{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Margaret Little, \'93Seeing and Caring: The Role of Affect in Feminist Moral Epistemology\'94 in 
\i Foundations of Ethics, 
\i0 ed. Shafer-Landau, Cuneo, Blackwell \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 On the majority view, \'93to be objective is to be detached; to be clear-sighted is to achieve distance; to be careful in deliberation is to be cool and calm\'94 (420). \
\
Men are associated throughout history with reason and women with affect (Lloyd 1979, 1983, McMillan 1982, Tuana 1992). [See also 
\i Flight from Woman 
\i0 by Karl Stern]. These roles are seen by Enlightenment thinkers especially as complementary but sharply bifurcated. \
\
Affect is necessary for identifying the \'93salient features of the situation (that one\'92s neighbor is in pain, for instance)\'94 (422). Seeing is itself a task (423). It\'92s not just seeing what is there, but seeing the significance of what is there, that is called for. We have to care for the 
\i person themselves 
\i0 (424). Without the affect (with instead dispassion) we are less likely to \'93pick up on what is morally salient\'94 (425). \
\
But is that enough? Is the \'93detached \'91point of view of the universe\'92\'94 more important? Is affect just a helpmeet? Moral awareness involves not just noticing pain but ascending to \'93conceptualize a situation in moral terms... to see it as meriting some response\'94 (425). We do not immediately respond, do not always respond, of course (426). \
\
This is a response to the skeptical charge about practical irrationality \'97 someone who sees what needs to be done but doesn\'92t do it, doesn\'92t even feel motivated to do it (427). Like being able to identify green by wavelength spectrometry but not by sight. But moral properties have no isomorphic subvenient bases, like color (428). So \'93Affect... has an ineliminable role in moral epistemology\'94 (428). \
\
\'93The traditional partition of reason and affect shows up in one final and very important way in discussions of morality. Historically, many who have granted morality\'92s intimate connection with affect have concluded that the connection comes at a price: it reveals that there are in fact no moral properties or moral truths. Philosophers from Hume to Mackie have argued that the necessary connection of a moral verdict to affect gives us 
\i in principle 
\i0 and 
\i ex ante 
\i0 reason, in advance of any substantive investigation into moral systems, for concluding that those claims do not correspond to the way the world is\'94 (428). \
\
Like desires, emotions seem to have the wrong mental-state-to-world fit. But some desires do have a desire-to-world fit. \
}