{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green26\blue26;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\})}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00);}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\})}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00);}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\})}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'02\'00);}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\})}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'02\'00);}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Outline of Chapters
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
	I propose to answer these questions building on six key writers who are both virtue ethicists and sensitive to the metaethical challenges facing their virtue theory. 	Naturally, some due attention will be paid to other background authors like G.E. Moore, Peter Geach, Elizabeth Anscombe and other contemporary virtue ethicists like Marthan Nussbaum and Judith Thomson. \
MACINTYRE\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	The second chapter is devoted to the first exemplar: Alasdair MacIntyre, especially 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
After Virtue 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
and 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Whose Justice? Which Rationality
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
? though I shall pay attention to 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Three Rival Versions of Ethical Inquiry.
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 While MacIntyre is vociferously critical of all modern philosophy, and even modern virtue ethics, he counts as a virtue ethicist for my purposes. \
	I shall summarize MacIntyre\'92s critique of modern ethical inquiry (conceived as a purely rational, secular attempt to define the universal good and universal right for all rational agents), his critique of expressivism, and his positive alternative (returning to a teleological, Aristotelian tradition). I shall build on his theory in two ways: the first is a presumptive case in favor of moral realism; the second a presumptive case in favor of natural teleology. Now, there are two ways to defend natural teleology. The first and more difficult is to index final causes (teloi) to nature in general; the second and more doable is to index final causes (teloi) to human nature. In the first way, final causes obtain in nature, in the cosmos as a whole. Teleological laws are a species of natural law along with microphysical laws, biological laws, mathematical laws, logical laws, and so on. In the second way, final causes do not obtain in the cosmos as a whole but only one part of it: evolved, rational creatures like ourselves. These final causes are observable in our practical reasoning, and in our rational practices. The phenomenology of practice (playing a game of chess, brewing a latte, earning a degree, maintaining a happy marriage) makes such natural human teloi necessary and indispensable facts. In my presumptive case for natural teleology, I confine myself to the second and easier of the two ways. I return to the first way later, in response to serious objections. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
FOOT\
	The second chapter is about Philippa Foot, especially her later 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Natural Goodness. 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
I shall summarize Foot\'92s critique of both G. E. Moore\'92s anti-naturalism and the subjectivism of Hume and others (especially Ayer, Stevenson, Hare, Mackie, Gibbard, and Blackburn).  Foot\'92s (2008) positive theory is that moral evaluation is ultimately grounded in these facts [\'97 that is, facts about human life], or in what Elizabeth Anscombe refers to as \'91Aristotelian necessities\'92, i.e. the moral virtues; and thus the evaluation of the human will should be determined by facts about the nature of human beings and of the life of our species\'94 (5).\
	I will build on her theory in three ways: the first is to take her help in building a presumptive case for cognitivism in ethics: it seems that ethical and more broadly normative terms refer. Developing Foot\'92s ideas about natural normativity, Annas says this: 
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 \'93What is so helpful for ethics from this kind of biological naturalism is that we find that the normativity of our ethical discourse is not something which emerges mysteriously with humans and can only be projected back, in an anthropomorphic way, onto trees and their roots. Rather, we find normativity in the realm of living things, plants and animals, already. It is part of the great merit of the work of Philippa Foot and Rosalind Hursthouse to have stressed this point. Like many important philosophical points, it is obvious once pointed out\'85\'94 (Annas 1996).
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 By uniting evaluations of humans and other (non-human) living things into a single coherent account, Foot\'92s cognitivism solves many interesting problems in moral semantics. Moral language does not, after all, have a special linguistic function. If she does not solve them definitively, she goes a long way to putting the burden of proof back on those who wish to deny the appearances. \
	Those who deny the appearances appeal to the special feature of evaluative that it is 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
motivating 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
or action-causing. This problem of the \'93motivational gap\'94 between normative facts and descriptive facts \'93might be 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
the 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
problem of ethics\'94 (Brown 2008, 95). This is the second way I shall build on her theory. I shall endorse and defend her alternate explanation of the \'93action-guiding character of morality\'94 \'97 that is, the very old but not very fashionable thesis that \'93acting morally is part of practical rationality\'94 (Foot 2008, 9). \
\
\
BROWN\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Third, I examine Stephen Brown's reductive, Darwinian virtue ethics, especially his rejection of eudaemonia, his solution to the "is/ought" gap, and his argument that reproduction is the function of humanity. \
In this chapter I return in force to the objection from a naturalistic (non-teleological) picture of the cosmos, of McDowell\'92s \'93bald nature\'94. \
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2)	}Teleology objection: 
\b0 Virtue ethics assumes or argues for teleology in nature, without which evaluations of living things including humans cannot get off the ground. An individual cactus or deer is evaluated by how well it instantiates the lifeform of its species. By contrast, Darwinism or neo-Darwinism is orthodox biology that is committed, it seems, to the view of disenchanted nature as a mono-causal order of efficient and material causation without final causation.  The orthodox \'93transformism\'94 that has held majority sway since Darwin implies that lifeforms are essentially plastic or fluid, which entails that deviation from the norm may be a defect or simply a new adaptive mutation. 
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Marinus Ferreira, \'93Reasons from Neo-Aristotelian Naturalism\'94
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28    Stephen Brown articulates the objection that there may not even be a human lifeform, in which case the basis for ethical and other normative evaluations is gone. 
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Stephen Brown, \'93Really Naturalizing Virtue\'94, 
\i Ethic@, 
\i0 Vol. 4., n. , P. 7-22, 2005. 
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Normative human nature objection: 
\b0 Virtue ethics also assumes that human nature or the human lifeform is so to speak normatively loaded. The very term 
\i virtue 
\i0 (a cognate of the Latin word for 
\i man
\i0 ) implies that 
\i humanity 
\i0 is a normative concept; a human can become fully human or inhuman. That is, one can fail to achieve one\'92s own humanity or one can become truly human.  Some ethical naturalists also put themselves at risk of this objection, when they ground normative facts and \'93queer\'94 values in humanity as if that were enough. For instance, Hursthouse says hers is an  enterprise of basing ethics in some way on considerations of human nature, on what is involved in being good qua human being\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Hursthouse 193.
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  Consequentialists try to demystify \'93queer\'94 values by grounding them in humanity somehow (our interests, desires, judgments, evaluations, natural ends, etc.). The assumption is that human nature is \'93natural\'94, so if values are \'93humanized\'94 then values become natural. But the shoe could fit the other foot. A critic could object that values are nonnatural so if values are humanized then human nature is nonnatural. Quite possibly, humanizing these mysterious values doesn\'92t naturalize them, but rather mystifies humanity. By contrast, \'93A fundamental tenet of naturalism is that human beings are continuous with nature\'94.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Brown 2004, p. 4
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 . McDowell sees the parity between reason and practical reason, and so naturalizes both in \'93second nature.\'94 Others, like Stephen Brown, not to be deterred want to naturalize human nature too. The point is that if humanity is discontinuous with nature then we seem to have a bi-furcated naturalism that violates the continuity of nature.\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
MCDOWELL\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fourth, I examine John McDowell's philosophical anthropology of "second nature" in the context of his "liberal naturalism", especially his unique brand of idealism or inter-subjectivism as it pertains to practical reason. \
McDowell critiques \'93biological naturalism\'94 or \'93empirical naturalism\'94 which is reductive. He rejects transcendent supernaturalism. The third way is non-reductive naturalism he calls \'93excellence naturalism\'94. \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Moral reasons externalism, but reasons internalism, moral realism, ethical naturalism (in regards to moral philosophy), non-naturalism (in regards to metaphilosophy). I \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
HURSTHOUSE\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Fifth, I examine Rosalind Hursthouse's appropriation of (and differences from) Foot, and her account of moral objectivity and moral naturalism. \'a0\
For Hursthouse, the question whether morality has \'93objectivity\'94 reduces to two distinct questions: (1) can morality be justified from outside, from a neutral, third-person, scientific point of view? And (2), can we solve the problem of moral disagreement \'97 can we save the normativity of morality from the debunking and deflationary accounts that point to moral disagreement to disprove putative morality\'92s objectivity? \
On the first question, Hursthouse is surprisingly quick. No, morality cannot be justified from \'93outside\'94. But that is not such a big problem as some have made it out to be. \
It is the second question she devotes virtually the whole chapter to. \
So on this chapter I sort out the stakes of moral constructivism and stance-indepenent realism in regards to a strong foundation for virtue ethics. \
As for naturalism, Hursthouse\'92s thesis is that her virtue ethical naturalism is an alternative to supernaturalism and to reductive naturalism. This theme she borrows whole clothe from McDowell. \
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	4)	}Normative rationality objection: 
\b0 Virtue ethics seems to elevate the status of humanity above other animals and perhaps the rest of nature. More specifically, it tends to make reason and practical reason special. For instance, Julia Annas asks: \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93Does \'85[a strong] relation between our rationality and the rest of our human nature as social animals give us a plausible form of 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
naturalism
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
? We might think not, if we think that the Aristotelian form is a plausible one. For it stresses continuities between the evaluative patterns in our lives and those that are to be found in the lives of plants and animals. The fact that we are rational animals makes a big difference\'85\'94 
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Annas, \'93What kind of naturalism?\'94
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 She notes that the more we emphasize our rationality, the less important appears that which we share with the rest of nature (our animality and materiality). She seems to endorse the stronger form of rationality despite the tension. Stephen Brown on the other hand is willing to bite the bullet that some or all of the normative authority of our rationality might be lost if we concede that humans are really continuous with plants and animals. He somewhat regretfully admits (while defending neo-Aristotelian naturalism!) that his uncompromisingly naturalistic virtue ethic \'93amounts to a kind of evolutionary ethics and, in the end, is fundamentally descriptive\'94 
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Brown, 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Moral Virtue and Nature
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 1.
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 He notes that the more we emphasize our common ancestry, our basic biological animality and (ultimately) origin of all living things in non-living chemicals and elements, the less important appears our normative rationality.  \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
ADAMS\
Moral anthropology. \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Sixth, I examine Robert Adams supernaturalistic, theistic virtue ethics, especially his avowal of divine command theory, his notion of "excellence", and how the unity and transcendence of the good informs his metaethical theory.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Some have worried that a traditional virtue ethic and a thoroughgoing naturalism are incompatible or at least uneasy bedfellows. Some ethical naturalists are content to relegate all value to humanity (all value thought and talk) and leave it at that. I do not think this kind of \'93naturalizing\'94 is in the spirit of naturalism. \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Naturalism it seems is more ambitious than to be content with just \'93basing ethics in some way on\'85 human nature.\'94\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0  Can virtue ethics be harmonized with the naturalistic approaches? The worry can be teased out into four related objections. Each highlights a real or apparent tension between unmodified virtue ethics and unmodified naturalism. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	1)	}
\b Divinity objection: 
\b0 Virtue ethics has been traditionally the purview of theists, from the divine nous of Aristotle to the divine logos of the Stoics to the divine Trinity of Aquinas, and orthodox naturalism tends to be atheistic, agnostic, or post-theist (apathetic).  If we come to believe that humans participate in the divine nous, are indwelt by a divine spark, or made in the image of God, it seems that we have left naturalism far behind. \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
}