{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Outro
\b0 \
MacIntyre\'92s appropriation of Anscombe\'92s charge to rethink moral philosophy has set the course for the inquiry to follow. Not only has his theory of virtue and of the phenomenology of human teleology shown to be illuminating, but I have placed myself within the third version of inquiry: tradition. Our task in what follows is certainly not 
\i geneaology
\i0 ; it may be mistaken for 
\i encyclopedia 
\i0 at points, since we must engage the arguments (and the inevitable taxonomies) of contemporary scholarship, however temporary and short-lived those encyclopedical entries may be. Our task in what follows is to understand and extend the tradition received from Aristotle, Aquinas, MacIntyre, Murdoch, and Brewer and put it in creative dialogue with the arguments of our remaining authors: Foot, McDowell, Hursthouse, Adams. \
Each of these authors has his or her own distinctive thesis and framework. But they all exist on a spectrum of more or less 
\i reductive. 
\i0 So before we engage them, first we must consider a lesser-known author whose arguments shall set the stage for what follows. His virtue ethics and neo-Aristotelian naturalism is the most reductive we shall consider.  That reductionism will point out the key metaethical challenges a virtue ethicist must face, especially the 
\i No Natural Teleology Objection 
\i0 (which is related to the 
\i No God Objection
\i0 ) and that author is Stephen R. Brown. \
\

\b Outro II\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 MacIntyre took and ran with Anscombe\'92s charge to re-think moral philosophy. His own Marx-indebted dissatisfaction with liberal ideology and his eventual Aristotle-indebted dissatisfaction with Marxism lead him to an unlikely solution: the Aristotelian tradition of virtue. The contemporary moral scene is a milieu of interminable disagreement, characterized by the rhetoric of a half-remembered objectivity and a simple, firm will to power. The two errant responses are the genealogical (which undermines all moral thought and talk) and the encyclopedic (which idolizes and calcifies whatever happens to be the majority view of the present), both of which err in the present by disrespecting the past. The proper response is to respect the past but help it, while recognizing that we are someone else\'92s past and deserve respect as well as help. Virtues play a key role in the ongoing practices we still engage in, professional, personal, religious, and political. But virtues are end-directed activities at which we can become excellent. Restoring the concept of 
\i telos 
\i0 to (at least) human practice and human nature (and at most, nature more generally) rebuilds out of the ruins of our contemporary moral disagreement a possibility identify what and which virtues will help us achieve the goods internal to our practices and become practical reasoners. Restoring the concept of telos restores the possibility of justified agreement and intelligible disagreement. \
But teleology in human practice, even if human practice is the only natural phenomenon in the whole cosmos wherein teleology occurs, demands an explanation. Merely to identify that our activities, communities, and narrative selves are end-directed admits of multiple explanations. It might be that we, like the rest of nature, find ourselves end-directed. Or it might be that we are unique and 
\i sui-generis 
\i0 in nature, utterly discontinuous with all that has come before us in the phylogenetic tree and (possibly) on our way to unprecedented and unimaginable heights. It might be that we are self-creators and that, knowing this, and despairing, our only goal is to avoid committing suicide individually and as a species. \
So it would help to know whether the goodness of virtue (in humans) is a human version of a broader natural phenomenon. In that task Philippa Foot will help us and to her we now turn. }