{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 The goal of this section, building on and extending MacIntyre\'92s account, is to establish the following two theses: \
\
Thesis 1: Human rational practice is essentially end-directed. (
\i Human Practice Teleology Thesis)
\i0 \
Thesis 2
\i : 
\i0 Human nature is essentially end-directed. (
\i Natural Human Teleology Thesis)
\i0 \
\
In the following section, I will defend a third thesis: \
Thesis 3: At least some of nature is essentially end-directed. (
\i Natural Teleology Thesis)
\i0 \
\
The three theses are closely related. I should say a word here about their relation before I present the cases. The fact that human practice is essentially end-directed is not so controversial. The controversy is over how to interpret or explain this fact. \
That human nature even exists is controversial (what is a \'91nature\'92?) and that it should be essentially end-directed is not widely discussed. My route to Thesis 2 is by way of Thesis 1. \
\
Argument 1: \
1. If human rational practice is essentially end-directed and human nature is essentially practical, then human nature is essentially end-directed. \
2. Human rational practice is essentially end-directed (From Thesis 1). \
3. Human nature is essentially practical.  \
4. Therefore, human nature is essentially end-directed. \
\
If we can amass evidence that to be human is to act and to 
\i act for reasons, 
\i0 and if such rational practice (acting for reasons) is end directed, then we have good reason to think to be human is to be end-directed. \
Thesis 3 is, of course, the least likely to persuade a certain sub-population of readers. Many take a dogmatic opposition to the notion that nature (non-human nature, that is) is end-directed as a sort of creed (section 2, sub-heading 4a) of the scientific worldview. But in spite of the abundance of appeals to authority decrying natural teleology as heresy, we must assess the evidence. Indeed, there are only a few reasons to reject the age-old picture of the cosmos as an at least partly directed system. Atheism is not, by itself, sufficient evidence that the cosmos as a whole or certain (non-human) parts of it are not end-directed systems. It might be that, even absent a god or 
\i geist 
\i0 or alien intelligence or panpsychist world-soul directing nature, that mindless teleological laws are fundamental natural laws (along with gravity, strong and weak micronuclei force, etc.) operating on and shaping the development of the cosmos or of certain of its parts. But this is to get ahead of ourselves. \
There are two ways to conceive the relation between Thesis 2 and Thesis 3. The first is that 2 is evidence for 3. Let\'92s look at that argument, in brief, first: \
\
Argument 2: \
1. Human nature is essentially end-directed. (Thesis 2, from Argument 1)\
2. Human nature is part of nature. (Assumption of Naturalism)\
3. At least some of nature is essentially end-directed. \
\
Argument 2 is ploddingly obvious. If humans are 
\i natural objects 
\i0 in the same sense that dolphins and giraffes are natural objects \'97 creatures that appear within the cosmos as a result of natural laws operating on normal physical stuff \'97 and if human nature is essentially end-directed, then the conclusion is hardly an inference at all as much as a re-statement of the premise that human 
\i nature 
\i0 is essentially end-directed. An analogy: Grand Cayman ocean water is transparent. And the Grand Cayman ocean is part of the oceans of the earth. Therefore, at least part of the oceans of the earth are transparent. \
\
But there is another way of conceiving the relation between Thesis 2 and Thesis 3. Thesis 3, if it can be supported on independent empirical and metaphysical grounds, can actually furnish support for Thesis 2. A preliminary version of that case runs thusly: \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Argument 3a:\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 1. At least some of nature is essentially end-directed.\
2. Human nature is part of nature.\
3. Therefore, humans are essentially end-directed. \
\
Clearly, this argument is invalid as it stands. It takes the same form as the following true but invalid argument: At least some of the oceans of the world are transparent. The Pacific Ocean is part of the oceans of the world. Therefore, the Pacific Ocean is transparent. Argument 3 does not specify whether 
\i all 
\i0 of nature is end-directed (the notion of cosmic teleology) or if only parts 
\i which 
\i0 parts. So it would need a supplementary hypothesis like: All natural entities that are living are essentially end-directed. \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Argument 3b: 
\b0 \
1. At least some of nature is essentially end-directed.\
2. Human nature is part of nature.\
3. All natural entities that are living are essentially end-directed. \
4. Humans are natural entities that are living.\
5. Therefore, humans are essentially end-directed. \
\
The biologist\'92s incorrigible operating assumption that organisms (and their parts?) have both 
\i functional forms 
\i0 and 
\i formal functions 
\i0 gives prima facie reason to think that living things are indeed end-directed. They are directed, for instance, toward life. And obviously humans are living things. So it would follow that humans are essentially end-directed. \
\
I will leave these theses as they stand for now and dive into the case that human 
\i practice 
\i0 is essentially end-directed. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://BFED54D5-F541-49F6-9090-FA78C2D1F39F"}}{\fldrslt 
\b \cf0 Thesis 1: Human rational practice is essentially end-directed. (
\i Human Practice Teleology Thesis)
\i0 \
}}\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Thesis 2
\i : 
\i0 Human nature is essentially end-directed. (
\i Natural Human Teleology Thesis)
\i0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Human nature is essentially rational 
\b0 \
Is human nature essentially and unavoidably teleological? If so, then it is essentially and unavoidably normative. \
To believe that, say, \'93to be human is to think rationally\'94 is to believe the fundamental normative truth that humans 
\i ought to 
\i0 think rationally, that that is what we are 
\i supposed 
\i0 to do. The force of \'93ought\'94 there is not a divine law ought, as Anscombe criticized. It is simply a reflection upon what as a species we are capable of attaining and what exemplary members of our species attain.  \
We are (as a species) are capable of rational thought, barring the effects of birth defect, mental illness, impaired brain functioning from injury or brain-addling drugs, and so on. Those who for any reason outside their control do not attain to to any individual capacity for rational thinking are defective in a sad but ultimately non-culpable way. Those who for some reason 
\i in their control 
\i0 do not attain to their individual capacity (assuming that such capacity is set, in part, in advance, by genetic factors among others) are defective in a culpable way. They are, in a word, bad thinkers. I won\'92t go so far as to accuse bad thinkers of being 
\i bad people 
\i0 (I.e., morally bad)
\i , 
\i0 just culpably bad in an important respect. And of course, people are responsible only to actualize their individual member-specific capacity for rational thinking, not some abstract or generalized species-specific capacity for rational thinking. The greatest math geniuses in the world who sweat and labor over their discipline to master new frontiers are praiseworthy for cultivating their intellects so far; the greatest math dunces in the world who nevertheless sweat and labor to grasp the basics are praiseworthy for cultivating their intellects so far. Intuitively, there is no blame on the math dunce for not being born with a mathematically-wired brain. \
To sum up: commonsense beliefs about human beings \'93Humans are capable of higher-order, rational thought\'94 distinguish us as a species from other animals. Moreover, they are normative.  Asserted explicitly as a normative statement, we make \'91ought-y\'92 judgments all the time, like \'93People should think things through,\'94 or \'93Bob should not be irrational.\'94  Asserted implicitly as an abbreviated Aristotelian Categorical, we say things like, \'93
\i we think rationally,\'94 
\i0 or \'93to be human is to be rational.\'94 And these provide presumptive reason to think that human nature is essentially teleological. There are facts \'97 facts we seem to discover rather than invent \'97 about the way we are and the way we ought to be. \
\

\b Human nature is essentially practical (we are practical reasoners)
\b0 \
Take a second commonsense belief: A human being is a practical reasoner in a human community. I would venture so far as to suggest this axiom as a definition of our species. (It is more accurate than flat-nailed featherless bipeds.) We are social animals by nature, and we are practical animals by nature, and we are reasoners by nature. But, building on the above paragraphs about rationality, each is important. All three together pick us out better than any one alone. \
The intuitive evidences for this axiom are so abundant and ready to hand it is hard to know where to start. A group of high school students exiting class for lunch stop in the hallway and argue about where to sit; a senate sub-committee convenes to deliberate on whether to pull federal funding from a particular health organization; a U.N. Assembly convenes to deliberate whether to place sanctions on a recalcitrant nation; a philosophy professor chats with the department chair about how to boost the number of majors; a father and mother sip wine, after the kids are in bed, while arguing over the grocery budget. Each of these situations, I hope, so familiar that my analysis will not (yet!) be controversial. The pattern each instantiates is a group of human beings engaging in practical reason \'97 a community thinking what to do. It is difficult to get out of bed in the morning without engaging in practical reasoning with others. Abduct the principle from the particulars: human beings, us, are practical reasoners in community. 
\i We 
\i0 are practical reasoners in communities. \
If this is true, the converse would be true: those who are not practical reasoners, or not in community, are not human. This corollary is the natural extension of the Greek view that exile was on par with, if not worse than, public execution. To remove you from your community is in an important sense to destroy you 
\i as a person. 
\i0 A hanging or poisoning only destroys you as a body. An exile is far worse than that. It rips you from your context, tears out from the social fabric the thread that you are. It turns you, while existing, into a non-being, a non-entity, an object. Regardless of whether we can sympathize with this way of thinking about exile, we can understand how one can be demoted from human status. \
We should not say that a non-praactical-reasoner 
\i is not human, 
\i0 but that they fail to be exemplary. Brain-dead, or mentally handicapped, or injured etc., persons are not 
\i non-human 
\i0 but they are importantly defective qua humans, as I think common sense can recognize. \
\
So are is human nature teleological? We have built a presumptive case from common sense that this is so. Human nature is 
\i what we are, 
\i0 and some (if not all) of the facts constituting what we are are normative facts about what we are capable of, what we ought to be. \
\
}