{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Michael Rea characterizes naturalism as either a thesis or as something else (a research program); either way, naturalism is a failure. \
What do we mean by "success" and "failure" in this context? Rea argues for a crtierion of "success" according to which a thesis or research program is not subject to "serious objections", or at least not as many as its rivals. If naturalism could be shown to be self-refuting or to "have rationally unacceptable consequences" then these would be devestating objections. But Rea thinks these objections are not "even in the right ballpark" (105%). Instead, Rea's naturalism (which I'll summarize below) fails by being "dissonant", where dissonance is "the malady that a philosophical position suffers from when it rationally commits its adherents to views that are in direct tension with whatever attitudes, goals, or values partly characterize the position" (105-6%). Not every philosophical position 
\i has 
\i0 "attitudes, goals," and "values", so not every philosophical position can fail by being dissonant. But positions like "empiricism, materialism, rationalism" do have attitudes, goals, and values and so are flexible enough with regard to the scientific and philosophical claims that constitute them to make consonance a virtue, and dissonance a vice. \
How serious a charge is the accusation of "dissonance"? Rea thinks that it is pretty serious. "It is not irrational to embrace a dissonant position, but it is unpleasant\'85" A verdict of dissonance would not have the same knock-down force of a verdict of incoherence, but it would be bad. He continues, "Dissonant theories fail along the dimensions of elegance and conservatism\'85 It is widely acknowledged that elegance and conservatism, among other pragmatic virtues, play an important role in scientific theory choice, and there is no reason to doubt that they play similar roles in philosophical decision making." (106%). \

\b What is naturalism\
}