{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Section Three Rival Versions\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Richard Cain (2008) summarizes MacIntyre\'92s clarification of tradition in this way: \'93For MacIntyre, the concepts distinctive of a particular historically embedded moral system are embodied in and draw meaning from particular forms of social practice. Practices in turn find their meanings and their developments in an ongoing narrative of stability and transformation within the history of a particular society. It is precisely the process of handing on these practices and narratives that constitutes a tradition. Traditions also help one understand the dynamic relationship between individuals as receivers of practices and narratives from their society and individuals as critical evaluators who sometimes alter or even reject moral resources available to them within their society and its constituting tradition. The passing on or breakdown of traditions also help explain the formation, maintenance, and development or decay of the particular norms of practical rationality that underpin moral enquiry and action within a society.\'94
\f1 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0 Cain, 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Cogito
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, 269-270, 2008.
\f1 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Section Introduction 3RV\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 In 
\i Three Rival Versions of Moral Inquiry, 
\i0 MacIntyre challenged himself and others to pick one out of these rivals. What distinguishes the three is their treatment of history. Genealogy uses the past as a weapon against the present; it tells stories about our ancestors that poison the well against us, that undermine any theorizing whatsoever, including its own. Encyclopedia uses the present as a weapon against the past; it arrogates state-of-the-art \'93facts\'94 to poison the well against our ancestors, undermining the trunk of which it is itself a branch. Neither of these will do. Each, in different ways, undermines itself even on its own terms. Even those 
\i within 
\i0 that version of moral inquiry can see, from within, the error. \
The third option is tradition. Tradition uses the past as (potentially) a help and guide to the present, and uses the present as (potentially at least) a help to the past. The past should not be a chain or uncrossable fence, but a starting point, a set of \'93givens.\'94 The stereotype of \'93traditional people\'94 is that they glorify and fixate on the past; in the present, then, they aim merely to repeat the past. Such people should not be called traditional but 
\i archeological
\i0 : they aim to uncover and preserve relics or to replicate them. MacIntyre is truly traditionalist: a tradition is a thing pass on. In that way, we in the present must press into the future but must not let ourselves start over every day, beginning again from scratch, like the amnesiac in the movies. The present should press into the future, doing better what ancestors tried but perhaps could not do. The present should also always recognize that it is not final and encyclopedic, that it will need the help of some other (future) present. \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 The chapters comprising this dissertation are something of a mix, in MacIntyre\'92s terms, between encyclopedia and tradition. I take the state-of-the-art within philosophical ethics to include virtue ethics as one of three major options. \
At the same time, theorizing about virtue and attempting to 
\i live virtuously 
\i0 is part of a much broader tradition than mere philosophical ethics. That tradition, that culture, that community, is engaged in a social project of living well according to a shared conception of what \'93well\'94 means. And for that tradition, culture, community, engaging in ethical theorizing and arguing with other theorists over (say) various definitions of virtue, over moral realism, moral knowledge, moral motivation, etc. are only part and perhaps not even a big part of living well. \
I myself belong to that tradition \'97 in turns Aristotelian, Augustinian, Platonic, Thomistic, American, and so on. I make no apologies for my membership, but I do wish to restrict myself as much as possible from employing all the resources of that tradition. I aim, as far as possible, to bracket those additional resources available to me, and those with me, since they are not available to those outside the tradition. I aim, in other words, to see just how much those of us from rival traditions can do with each other, and how many important questions we can hope to settle, without the benefit of a shared tradition. }