{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## How should one live? Two kinds of reason, two kinds of morality: prudential and moral\
\
\
In order to address these questions, I would like to explore McDowell's account of virtue as knowledge. His first claim is that the "point of engaging in ethical reflection... lies in the interest of the question 'How should one live?'"[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] \
\
Before we look at McDowell's answer, let's frame the discussion. The familiar way of framing the "how should one live?" question is this. There are two sorts of motives that drive everyone: prudential reasons and moral reasons. Prudential reasons incline one to look out for oneself. One is naturally, selfishly inclined to pursue one's own happiness or well-being.  On the other hand, moral reasons drive one to look out for others. One is morally constrainted to do one's duty, sometimes in accord with, but often against one's inclinations. Kant (or the stereotypical figure in the literature whom people call "Kant") presents morality as a particular set of reasons (all deriving from the moral law) that obligate one to do what is right, whether or not it is prudential. Otherwise, so long as one is doing one's duty, one can answer the "how should one live?" question with a list of prudential considerations: get a good job, save for retirement, eat healthy foods, exercise, make friends, and so on.\
\
Within this familiar frame, morality becomes especially pressing at the moment of moral dilemmas. Edmund Pincoffs distinguishes two broad conceptions of philosophical ethics he calls \'93Quandary Ethics\'94 and \'93Character Ethics.\'94 Quandary ethics is focused on the short-term resolution of immediate moral problems, either by dissolving moral perplexity or giving some (hopefully rational) basis for a particular decision or course of action. The Quandary ethicists are those Pincoffs quotes at the beginning of his article (such as Hare, Toulon, Brandt). They think that:\
\
>The business of ethics is to clarify and solve "problems", i.e. situations in which it is difficult to know what one should do; that the ultimate beneficiary of ethical analysis is the person who, in one of these situations, seeks rational ground for the decision he must make; that ethics is therefore primarily concerned to find such grounds, often conceived of as moral rules and the principles from which they can be derived; and that meta-ethics consists in the analysis of the terms, claims, and arguments which come into play in moral disputation, deliberation, and justification in problematic contexts.[@pincoffs1971quandary 552. Cf. @macintyre1984does] \
\
By contrast, character ethics is focused on the long-term goal of living well by executing worthwhile goals in every day life.  Aristotle is an example of a Character Ethicist. Aristotle:\
\
>...thought of ethics as a branch of politics, which in turn he thought of as a very wide-ranging subject having to do generally with the planning of human life so that it could be lived as well as possible. Moral problems are given their due but are by no means stage-centre. The question is not so much how we should resolve perplexities as how we should live.[@pincoffs1971quandary 553-4] \
\
These two broad conceptions correlate to two conceptions of moral reasons. It might seem that moral reasons are distinct from non-moral reasons (such as prudential, aesthetic, egoistic reasons etc.). \
\
Let the Quandary ethicist represent the view of moral reasons as special, perhaps overriding, kinds of reasons pertaining to the rights, obligations, or duties of one individual in relation to others. Even in asking the "how do I live?" question, a Quandary ethicist is likely assuming that the answer will include a set of moral reasons weighed against or in opposition to non-moral reasons (such as prudential reasons). As Martha Nussbaum points out, a Quandary ethicist might ask \'93how do specifically moral ends and commitments figure among the ends that [a moral agent] pursues?\'94 But she clarifies: \
\
>This question is posed in a characteristically modern way, presupposing a distinction between the moral and the non-moral that is not drawn, as such, by the Greek thinkers. But if one objects to that characterization, one can rephrase it: for example, What role does concern for others for their own sake play in here scheme of ends? What role does political justice play in her scheme of ends? And so forth.\'94[@nussbaum1999virtue 174] \
\
Foot makes a similar point in distinguishing our sense of 'moral' from the older sense.\
\
>Many if not most moral philosophers in modern times see their subject as having to do exclusively with relations between individuals or between an individual and society, and so with such things as obligations, duties, and charitable acts... \'91moral\'92 and \'91prudential\'92 considerations [are] contrasted in a way that was alien to Plato or Aristotle.[@foot2001natural 68] \
\
There is a powerful social and psychological force to the distinction between moral and prudential, other-regarding and self-regarding,[@slote1995agent] altruistic and egoistic[@nagel1978possibility], benevolent and selfish, conscience and self-love.[@annas2009egoism; @macintyre1967egoism; @bloomfield2012eudaimonia; @huang2010self]  It results in a bifurcation between two kinds of reason. And certainly considerations about myself are conceptually distinct from considerations about my family, my friend, my society, or my species. \
\
The question of how to live is a question about practical reasons. But what kind? Are moral reasons are *one type* of practical reason, or does any practical reason count as a "moral" reason (broadly construed)?[@foot2002virtues chapter 13, "Are Moral Reasons Overriding?"; Cf. also @mcdowell1978moral] Suppose a greeting card or an internet meme recommends that you "live well, love hard, and laugh often." Is this platitude aiming to provide you with a moral reason, a practical reason, a prudential reason, an aesthetic reason, or something else? \
\
\
### One kind of reason: practical reasons\
\
\
What is required is a step back to examine the natural of practical reasons themselves and how they relate to practical reasoning in general. I would like to argue that there is one genus of reasons for action: practical reasons. There are many species of practical reason, but proper distiction is not between "moral" and "non-moral" but between various kinds of moral reasons. \
\
MacIntyre's earliest ethical work distinguished the significance of moral judgments compared to other kinds of judgments. In a careful critique of both intuitionists such as Moore and emotivists such as Stevenson, MacIntyre concluded that both (mistakenly) assume that moral judgments and moral terms have significance only in their referential meaning. The intuitionists, of course, concluded that moral terms refer to a non-natural property, while the emotivists concluded that moral terms do not refer to such a property and so do not refer at all. (Naturalists, later in the 20th century, argue that moral terms refer to natural properties.) MacIntyre\'92s alternative denies the assumption entirely; moral judgments \'93have their own kind of logic\'94 and their significance, like other kinds of judgments, comes from \'93exhibiting the logic of their usage.\'94[@murphy2003macintyre 118, quoting p. 73 of MacIntyre\'92s master\'92s thesis *The Significance of Moral Judgments*] The significance of moral judgments is that \'93they enable us to solve problems of appraisal and of action.\'94 Solving problems of evaluation (we might say) and action is their place in \'93a pattern of language and action\'85\'94 He continues: \
\
>Above all they arise out of the way in which we see the world and the way in which our language allows us to see the world. We cannot sufficiently emphasize the direction given to our appraisals by the language which happens to be available for our descriptions. It is as we see the facts that we judge the world.\
\
MacIntyre\'92s point is that moral judgments are not *simply* useful in moral dilemmas or quandaries. They appear, at the earliest stages of childhood development, in a pattern of usage that is inextricable from the human activities of reasoning, acting, and appraising. Evaluative judgments appear in the widest imaginable spread of human activities, from politics to playgrounds, from sociology to social life, from the practices of law and medicine to the professions of journalism and psychology, from the sciences to the arts. Even if this point be granted, moral dilemmas are not *unreal*. Moral dilemmas are a special version of our general \'93problems of appraisal and action.\'94 They may be particularly vexing, but they are no different from the general problems of how to live, how to be happy, what kinds of public policies to pursue, what apparently meaningful types of life are really meaningful. \
\
### History of error\
\
To make this case, it is helpful to examine how historically we came to make the familiar, but faulty, distinction between moral and non-moral reasons.\
\
Foot cites Mill as an early proponent of the distinction: \
\
>J. S. Mill, for instance, expresses this modern point of view quite explicitly, saying in his essay *On Liberty* that \'91A person who shows rashness, obstinacy, self\uc0\u8208 conceit .\'a0.\'a0. who cannot restrain himself from harmful indulgences\'92 shows faults (Mill calls them \'91self\u8208 regarding faults\'92) which \'91are not properly immoralities\'92 and while they \'91may be proofs of any amount of folly .\'a0.\'a0. are only a subject of moral reprobation when they involve a breach of duty to others, for whose sake the individual is bound to have care for himself\'92.[@foot2001natural 68]\
\
Mill distinguishes folly from immorality, where folly is failure to provide goods for oneself. MacIntyre further summarizes the conceptual roots of the terms 'moral' and 'ethical'.\
\
>'Moral\'92 is the etymological descendant of \'91moralis\'92. But \'91moralis\'92, like its Greek predecessor *ethikos* --  Cicero invented \'91moralis\'92 to translate the Greek word in the *De Fato* -- means \'91pertaining to character\'92 where a man\'92s character is nothing other than his set dispositions to behave systematically in one way rather than another, to lead on particular kind of life... The early uses of 'moral' did not contrast with \'93\'91prudential\'92 or \'91self interested\'92\'94 nor with \'93\'91legal or \'91religious\'92... The word to which it is closest in meaning is perhaps most simply \'91practical\'92.\'94[@macintyre1984after 38] \
\
This conceptual history illuminates that moral and non-moral reasons each exemplify, in their own ways, a broader conceptual structure of practicality. We identify *reasons to act*. \
\
This point is not merely of historical or etymological interest (though of course, the narrow sense of the word 'moral' in discourse today is clear enough). The point is that  qualities such as benevolence and generosity we tend to call human \'93moral goodness\'94 are of a type with a *broader category of goodness*.  Foot explains: \'93I want to show that judgments usually considered to be the special subject of moral philosophy should really be seen as belonging to a wider class of evaluations of conduct with which they share a common conceptual structure.\'94 [@foot2001natural 66-67] \
\
In the story of the word 'moral' we can trace the history of the concept of practical reason. The domain of practicality is two fold: it is the domain of *practical reasons* (facts in the world calling for action) which are identified by the *practical reason* (of an agent). \
\
That domain was subdivided into narrower fields: First, it meant a particular way of life, habit, or character. Then, it meant 'maxim', a practical lesson, like the \'93moral of the story\'94, the point, that to be acted on, the rule. Third, it came to mean a domain of rules of conduct that are \'93neither theological nor legal nor aesthetic.\'94[@macintyre1984after 39] Finally, in the 1700s, it meant a particular kind of conduct, especially sexual conduct. \
\
The distinction between moral and non-moral *reasons* shows up in a similar distinction between two different kinds of 'ought' or 'should'. Elizabeth Anscombe had observed in 1958 that a similar distinction (between moral and non-moral) runs betweeen two senses of 'ought': \
\
>The terms \'93should\'94 or \'93ought\'94 or \'93needs\'94 relate to good and bad: e.g. machinery needs oil, or should or ought to be oiled, in that running without oil is bad for it, or it runs badly without oil. According to this conception, of course, "should" and "ought" are not used in a special "moral" sense when one says that a man should not bilk. (In Aristotle's sense of the term "moral" [\uc0\u942 \u952 \u953 \u954 \u972 \u962 ], they are being used in connection with a moral subject\u8209 matter: namely that of human passions and [non\u8209 technical] actions.) But they have now acquired a special so\u8209 called "moral" sense-\u8209 i.e. a sense in which they imply some absolute verdict (like one of guilty/not guilty on a man) on what is described in the "ought" sentences used in certain types of context: not merely the contexts that Aristotle would call "moral"\u8209 -passions and actions\u8209 -but also some of the contexts that he would call "intellectual.\'94[@anscombe1958]\
\
The peculiarly *moral* 'ought' means, for some, a final, verdictive ought -- like the kind of "thou shalt" language used in the Ten Commandments. But *this* kind of ought, Anscombe thinks, only makes sense in the mouth of a believer in divine law. I should prefer rather to reserve the final, verdictive ought for what Foot (following Davidson) calls what someone should do "all things considered."[@foot2001natural 57]\
\
What would happen if we re-opened our focus and looked at practical reasons as a whole? That is exactly what the broader "Character ethics" conception of practical reasons does. Julia Annas\'92 presentation of virtue as as a skill illuminates this same point, I think, beautifully. She says, "I should develop an account of virtue in which I show have central to the idea that the practical reasoning of the virtuous person is analogous in important ways\'85 to the practical reasoning of someone who's exercising a practical skill.\'94[@annas2011intelligent 3] What she calls the \'93skill analogy\'94 might be taken as problematic since it drains the peculiarly *moral* quality out of virtue. The opposite is true: The skill analogy fills the project of living daily life with the potential for virtue. The virtuous person is *good at* and not just *good* \'97 good at helping others, good at thinking ahead, good at human life. The vicious person, by contrast, is not just bad but *bad at* the essential elements of human life. Of course, being born with a paucity of natural talents is not a matter of immorality or is being born with an abundance of natural talents a matter of moral worth. Rather, the admirable person makes *good use* of his or her fortune, and the despicable person makes bad use of it. The admirable person is all the more admirable when he or she proves skillful of making good use even of very bad fortune; and the miserable person is all the more pitiable when he or she wastes even of very good fortune. \
\
That is not to say that practical reason does not include the domain of "concern for others". It is only to argue that other-regarding qualities such as benevolence and generosity (which are easily thought of under the description human \'93moral goodness\'94) are *of a type* with a broader category of goodness.  She says: "judgments usually considered to be the special subject of moral philosophy should really be seen as belonging to a wider class of evaluations of conduct with which they share a common conceptual structure.\'94 [@foot2001natural 66-67] \
\
That said, concern for others is what I call \'932nd-personal morality\'94. That is, my duties to you and to others. This would include obligations, values, and virtues as well as broader social or political ones. I suggest that the dominant virtue here is not only justice but love \'97 I.e., a strong regard for the other, a charitable orientation to promoting the good of others, refusing to harm them, and committing to protect them from harm.  But the rest of the practical domain I call 1st-personal and 3rd-personal. The entire set is the domain of practicality \'97 what one ought to do or ought to think, say, etc. The three sub-domains are defined by the object with regard to which one ought to do and not do this or that. \
\
The domain of 1st-person morality is proper respect and care for one\'92s self \'97 self-love or enlightened self-interest. This is what Mill called the domain of \'93prudence\'94. It includes the virtues that benefit both oneself and others (moderation and courage) but especially practical wisdom, without which none of the other virtues do me much good. \
\
The domain of 3rd-person morality is proper respect and care for everything that is not you or me \'97 animals and plants, pets and work animals, our possessions, our earth and environment, and perhaps even our solar system. The primary virtue of this domain is justice, a respect for the whole and the proper arrangement of all the parts.^[If God exists, then 3rd-personal morality would require piety to him or her, since on most theisms God is not strictly speaking \'93one of us\'94 but still demands our allegiance, sacrifice, or what have you.]\
\
Considering practical reason as a whole in this way helps us to understand Aristotle and the neo-Aristotelians. Jack Weinstein says: \'91The term practical rationality is derived from Aristotle\'92s *phronesis*. It is to be distinguished from *sophia*, a more technical form of reasoning. Practical rationality leads to more approximate conclusions; it takes context and relative facts into account, and it usually leads to moral or political conclusions.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 60-61] If we take philosophical ethics to be reflection on morality as a whole then, on this view, philosophical ethics is reflection on practical rationality. Practical rationality is simply the process of deciding what to do. It is the process of thinking through what to do. Or, in Gibbard\'92s unforgettable phrasing, it is \'93thinking how to live\'94.[@gibbard2009thinking] \
\
The argument is simple: We act on reasons. We pursue what is good, or what seems good. There are various types of good; hence there are various types of reasons. But we do not act *only* on one type of reason  (moral reasons). Rather, we weigh and balance *all* the salient reasons we are aware of at the time when we deliberate and make decisions. In making a business transaction, the entrepreneur may allow considerations of justice to outweigh considerations of profit; or, he may allow considerations about loyalty to a friend outweighs considerations of justice. These two paths are not, respectively, \'93the moral\'94 path and the immoral path. They are both moral. They are both practical. Each path requires the agent to consider all salient reasons, weigh them, and fit them all together into a coherent plan to act this way rather than that, all things considered.\
\
So I conclude that the domain of morality is, if anything at all, the sub-domain of practical reason concerned with obligations, duties, rights, goods, and harms that might obtain between one member of society to another. This way of putting the classification clearly connects \'93morality\'94 with politics, family life, education, and so on. However, it paints in bright and burning colors the distinction between morality as a part of practical reason and practice itself. We are, first, and foremost, practical creatures, not merely moral or moralizing ones. \
\
\
## Is practical reason knowledge?\
\
McDowell argues that the virtues are various "sensitivities" to the salient facts about how to live. Virtue is a kind of knowledge, namely *practical knowledge* (a \'93disposition to act well\'94).  The answer to "how?" questions is an item of knowledge. "How do I unscrew a light bulb?" is a request for an instruction ("twist left") or set of instructions, ("first, grip the light bulb; then twist left until it comes loose."). The answer to the question of how to live will be not just a proposition but a plan. \
\
To see why it makes sense to conceive of virtue as practical knowledge, suppose that some platitudinous value (say, kindness) is really a virtue. The kind person is reliably kind and is kind *on purpose*. A person who merely happens to be kind or who commits acts of kindness resulting from blind instinct does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. A person who is kind once, or even every now and then, likewise does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. Rather, a kind person is one who is regularly sensitive to a range of reasons for behaving in a particular way. The kind person, McDowell adduces, "has a reliable sensitivity to a certain sort of requirement which situations impose on behavior" and such "deliverances of a reliable sensitivity are cases of knowledge."[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] The kind person *knows* what is called for, is intentional about avoiding cruel or indifferent behavior, and so on. \
\
If kindness is \'93a sort of perceptual capacity\'94, \'93specialized sensitivity\'94 to a particular range of reasons for action (say, the feelings of others), then perhaps the same holds true for other virtues.[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] In fact, McDowell suggests, the notion that virtues are specialized sensitivities \'97 each a kind of knowledge \'97 helps us understand the Socratic notion of the unity of virtue. \
\
These reflections support the notion that this kind of knowledge ("sensitivity to reasons") is necessary for the virtue but not sufficient. For it might be that one is sensitive to what another would feel but still fail to act rightly. Why? Perhaps, like the overindulgent parent, one is *too* sensitive to the feelings of the child or *not sensitive enough* to other considerations, like the child\'92s health or (McDowell\'92s example) fairness. The virtuous person is sensitive to a whole range of reasons; since reason A and reason B might commend different acts, part of virtue must be the meta-cognitive capacity to reflect upon all those reasons available to one, to rank and order them. \
\
McDowell\'92s \'93preliminary case\'94 that virtue is knowledge is that the \'93requirement imposed by the situation\'85 must exhaust his reason for acting as he does.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] It would disqualify the act as a candidate for an example of kindness if the agent performed it *because* it was kind *and because good repute was likely to follow*. If we run the same calculus on each particular virtue, we can hypothesize that virtuous agents\'92 behavior in each case is explained by their sensitivity to those particular kinds of reasons. In turn, their behavior in general (when virtuous) is explained by their sensitivity in general. He concludes, \'93thus the particular virtues are not a batch of Independent sensitivities. Rather, we use the concepts of the particular virtues to mark similarities and dissimilarities among the manifestations of a single sensitivity which is what virtue, in general, is: an ability to recognize requirements which situations impose on one's behavior. It is a single complex sensitivity of the sort which we are aiming to instill when we aim to inculcate a moral outlook.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 333]\
\
Now, if virtue is knowledge, and (rational, deductive sorts of) knowledge are codifiable in propositional form, then it would seem to be necessary that virtue knowledge is codifiable. But \'91knowing-what-to-do\'92 is not codifiable, so virtue must not be knowledge. \
\
On this objection, the virtuous person enjoys knowledge of one or a few universal ethical precepts and reliably calculates the application of those principles to individual occasions. The virtuous person\'92s ethical arguments \'93take the form of a \'91practical syllogism\'92\'94 wherein the universal proposition is the major premise and the \'93relevant particular knowledge\'94 is a minor premise, while the issuing conclusion is the judgment of \'93what is to be done.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 336] Furthermore, on this objection, the defender of Humean moral psychology can keep the identification of relevant particular knowledge with a \'93minor premise\'94 but substitute the proposed major premise (a proposition such as \'93It is always good to be courageous\'94) with a non-cognitive desire or commitment (such as \'93*I want* to be courageous\'94 or \'93Be courageous!\'94). Now, they can explain how a virtuous person and non-virtuous person can both perceive a situation identically but fail to perform the same action with reference to their different desires or commitments. \
\
The problem with this objection, McDowell thinks, is not so much a problem with our moral theory but a problem with our conception of rationality. The problem stems from a \'93deep-rooted prejudice\'94 that rationality is a rule-following procedure. If rationality is a rule-following procedure, then it follows that *either* practical rationality and morality are likewise rule-following procedures *or* that practical rationality and morality is not, ultimately, sufficiently *rational*.  Some philosophers (often followers of Hume but not necessarily Hume himself) think that morality is a not rational domain but a domain of sentiments, desires, commitments, approvals, and so on. Other philosophers (often followers of Kant) think that morality is a rational domain and hence must be a matter of identifying first principles and \'93applying\'94 them to particular situations. But what they share in common is a belief that \'93rationality must be explicable in terms of being guided by a formulable universal principle.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] This common belief McDowell wishes to refute. MacIntyre, similarly,  denies the assumption that normative ethical rules can be derived from universal ethical principles the way we \'93apply\'94 universal logical truths to particular logical conclusions via a middle term.[@macintyre1984does.]\
\
McDowell\'92s discussion here (drawing on Wittgenstein and others) is hard to follow. The point seems to be that even apparently obvious cases where the rational thing to do is to follow an objective rule (say, by extending a series of numbers) turn out to be cases of a much messier process in which there is no such objective rule by appeal to which we can explain rational thoughts or behaviors. If Bob instructs Charlie to \'93add 2\'94 to a number and continue applying the rule indefinitely, we tend to be confident Charlie will produce \'932, 4, 6, 8,\'94 etc., which will \'93churn out the appropriate behavior with the sort of reliability which a physical mechanism, say a piece of clockwork, might have.\'94 We postulate a \'93psychological mechanism, underlying his behavior, by an inference analogous to that whereby one might hypothesize a physical structure underlying the observable motions of some inanimate object.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] The \'93ground and nature of our confidence\'94 that we will reliably apply rules is not but a common form of life. The \'91form of life\'92 is a term of art here from Wittgenstein (and quoted with approval from Stanley Cavell) that refers to that difficult-to-define process by which we learn how reliably to use words in our native language, how to make exclamations like a pained \'93ow!\'94 or an excited \'93ooh!\'94, when to laugh at jokes, and when to cry in pity. Our shared rationality, McDowell suggests, is not grounded in \'93external\'94 objective rules but in a shared form of life or what he calls a \'93congruence of subjectivities\'94.[@mcdowell1979virtue 339] McDowell admits this is a disconcerting hypothesis; it induces \'93vertigo.\'94 But, our response to such vertigo should not be to embrace a \'93consoling myth\'94. That myth he says is the two notions that (a) rule-following is a psychological mechanism that \'97 absent mistakes \'97 guarantees consistency, and that there exist objective facts of the matter over and above the congruence of subjectivities. If we abandon these two notions and embrace the model of deductive rationality as grounded only in our intersubjective form of life, then the corresponding model of practical rationality will become tenable. \
\
Although McDowell argues that virtue is not codifiable, still it is a kind of knowledge. But if virtue knowledge is not codifiable then how is it *consistent*? What guarantees that the moral person\'92s behavior is intelligibly the same from case to case? On the one hand, if moral knowledge is rational then it is consistent from case to case and situation to situation; but if, as McDowell has been arguing, both deductive reasoning and practical reasoning are not merely consistent by being like a rule-following machine or computer, how do we explain the virtuous person's reliably correct behavior? Section 5 of the article answers this question by way of Aristotle's practical syllogisms.\
\
The 'practical syllogism' takes the following shape: \
\
1. X is good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. (E.g., it is good to instantiate justice in the classroom).\
2. Z would be X. (E.g., giving everyone a chance to re-take a quiz that was unavailable due to technical problems would be instantiate justice in my classroom.)\
3. Therefore, Z would be good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. \
\
On the strictly deductive logical model, the role of the major premise is to provide rock solid universal ethical principles from which to derive particular moral duties. But McDowell resists this model. On the strictly non-cognitivist model, without universal ethical principles we are left with universal psychological states (consistent desires, plans, values, or norms). McDowell also resists this. On the non-codifiable model, what does the major premise do? Its role, he says, is to state a "certain conception of how to live... [namely] the *virtuous person's conception* of the sort of life a human being should lead."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343. Emphasis added.] It is clear upon reflection that this account is a sort of circular reasoning. For the virtuous person's conception of how to live is itself conditioned by what he called earlier 'the moral outlook'. That conception of how to live, in turn, conditions what particular saliences are noticed (what minor premises) and generates practical conclusions about what is to be done. What kind of life should a human being lead? The answer "cannot be definitively written down."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] Furthermore, "Any attempt to capture it in words will recapitulate the character of the teaching whereby it might be instilled: generalizations will be approximate at best..."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] The upshot of the combination of non-codifiability with a practical syllogistic form is that the virtuous person takes for a rule of life some conception of how to live but that this conception is part of what it means to be a virtuous person. (Hence the vertigo.)\
\
We might wonder why we are bothering about formal syllogistic reasoning at this point. But this way of understanding the practical syllogism *does* do good job of providing a plausible explanation of moral motivation (reasons one might act in some way) and moral behavior (reasons one acted that way). To paraphrase McDowell: "Explanations of judgments about what to do are explanations of actions."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342. Verbatim, he says: "The explanations, so far treated as explanations of judgments about what to do, are equally explanations of actions."] I can explain your behavior by understanding that you were concerned for your friend\'92s welfare and reached out to help. Likewise, you can explain your decision to help by assuring me that you are concerned for your friend\'92s welfare. For McDowell, the general structure of the practical syllogism is useful. He says \'93the rationality of virtue\'85 is not demonstrable from an external standpoint.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 346]\
\
\
\
## Is practical knowledge practical?\
\
The objection familiarly attributed to Hume is that practical reasons by themselves cannot motivate, at least not by themselves. If this were so, moral reasons could not satisfy the "practical requirement". Expressivism is motivated in large part by the attempt to satisfy the *practical* dimension of practical reason (at the cost of the "rational" part). \
\
>Expressivism in this form suggests a naturalistic interpretation of practical reason, one that may seem appropriate to the enlightened commitments of the modern scientific world view. It is naturalistic metaphysically, insofar as it makes no commitment to the objective existence in the world of such allegedly questionable entities as values, norms, or reasons for action.[@seppracticalreason]\
\
As Simon Blackburn summarizes, naturalism asks:\
\
>... No more of the world than we already know is there\'97the ordinary features of things on the basis of which we make decisions about them, like or dislike them, fear them and avoid them, desire them and seek them out. It asks no more than this: a natural world, and patterns of reaction to it.[@blackburn1985spreading] \
\
On this familiar view, \'93cognition and volition are distinct.\'94 Practical reasoners do not simply enjoy  a \'93single complex sensitivity\'94 to what a situation requires; they also need the presence of a conative mental state (such as a desire) as well. In McDowell\'92s example, one is aware that one\'92s friend is in trouble and that the friend is able to be comforted (the cognitive bit) and a desire (or motivation or inclination or settled passion) for helping one\'92s friends (the non-cognitive bit). Surely these two *together* and neither in isolation explains the behavior. For suppose that two persons in the same situation are equipped with identical perceptual capacities and so sensitive to the same range of reasons for action, but only one of them does the right thing. If such a supposed situation were to obtain, it would disconfirm McDowell\'92s conclusion.\
\
\
\
The problem with this objection is that, as McDowell has plausibly argued, an essential component of the awareness of the facts (that one\'92s friend is in trouble) is the very sensitivity to a range of requirements for action. The difference between the vicious and virtuous person lies not just in their desires and reactions to what they notice about the world but in the noticing itself. (Furthermore, McDowell points out, this non-cognitivist makes use of the deductive model of practical reasoning he has been at pains to deflate.)\
\
One man\'92s *modus ponens* is another man\'92s *modus tollens.* If virtue is to be identified with a single complex sensitivity, then a supposed situation in which two persons perceive a situation and its practical requirements identically but act differently cannot obtain.[@mcdowell1979virtue 333] Socrates took this line. But McDowell suggests we look to Aristotle.  Aristotle allowed that \'93appreciation of what [a virtuous person] observes is clouded, or unfocused, by the impact of a desire to do otherwise.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 334] The point of such an allowances is that the break between the sensitivity to reasons (which is virtue) and a resultant wrong action occurs when other psychological factors interfere. What interference? McDowell mentions desires and also a \'93distortion in one\'92s appreciation\'94 of the relevant reasons.[@mcdowell1979virtue 334]\
\
So McDowell's thesis is that virtue is a kind of knowledge, namely, a perceptual sensitivity to a range of facts that are conceptually defined as reasons for action. The hypothetical counterexample is one wherein two agents "notice" the identical reasons for action but do not actually *act* identically. McDowell's response is that while noticing a requirement for action is necessarily motivating *to some extent*, other psychological factors may interfere with the resulting correct action. \
\
Donald Davidson adds a new objection. He argues to the effect that a person might fail to perform the resultant right action *even without such interfering factors.*McDowell responds that the point is true, but it is not an objection. Aristotle\'92s account of continence details that continence is not a virtue. Continence is better than incontinence, but not as good as virtue. The continent person is able to perform the right action because he recognizes it as right, *despite* countervailing pressures (from desires, say) to do the wrong action. Since a fully developed virtue definitionally includes having the proper motivation as well, continence is only needed in the absence of a fully developed virtue. Furthermore, the virtuous person is not always one who \'93balances\'94 reasons for X against countervailing reasons for Y. The virtuous person is the one for whom simply identifying a reason (\'93in this situation, courage requires that I run into danger\'94) silences countervailing reasons. The virtuous persons sees the danger (and perhaps feels rightly apprehensive) but also sees that courage in the face of this danger is required; the latter perception, according to McDowell, \'93silences\'94 other pressures.[@mcdowell1979virtue 335] The merely continent person has to \'93weigh\'94 reasons; the virtuous person fluently and instantly *acts* on the best reason.\
\
This discussion from McDowell is helpful but leaves much to be desired. What I have argued above about the nature of practical reasons in general supplies what is missing. \
\
Seen in this light, it is obvious that practical reasons can and do motivate us. There might be reasons to \uc0\u966  that I am not aware of and thus am not motivated by. Perhaps it is true that one ought to save for retirement, but I may fail to do so. The internalist urges that reasons *for me* must connect up with my motivational structure. Defined widely enough, I can agree to this way of stating things. If by "my motivational structure" we simply mean my overall disposition toward the good. I am oriented to pursue good things, and avoid bad things. Whatever may appear to me to fall under the description of 'good' I will, ipso facto, be oriented toward (whether I pursue it or merely approve of it and admire it). Whatever may appear to me to fall under the description 'bad' I will, ipso facto, oriented away from it (whether I avoid it or merely disapprobate it). \
\
Apparent counterexamples that one might furnish to disprove the point actually serve, with sufficient clarification, to reinforce it. For example, someone might say, "It's ridiculous to think that I always pursue the good, because I sometimes do wrong." Of course, sometimes we do the wrong thing. The proper response is that we perceive the bad as the good. Someone might say, "But sometimes I perceive the bad *as bad* and pursue it anyway." The response is that we sometimes take a bad or dismotivating reason into an overall reason to do something, all things considered.\
\
My view shares common features with motivational internalism; however, I do not wish to deny what is plausible in motivational externalism, that there are reasons "out there" that *would* motivate me if I knew about them but which I do not know about. However, I find the internalism/externalism labels unhelpful and shall attempt to make my case plausible not by naming my positions but by characterizing what I mean as clearly as possible. The concept of a practical reason is the concept of *what to do*, which has its "practical" or motivational component "built-in" so to speak. And while it often happens that one's practical reasons conflict or are indeterminate, nevertheless, a set of practical reasons can constitute the *overriding* practical reason: *the thing to do*, all things considered. \
\
In sum, the phrase 'moral reasons' is fatally ambiguous. In one sense, moral reasons (i.e., facts about what is good for others) are simply one type of practical reason; but in another sense, *any* practical reason (i.e., objective normative and evaluative facts about what is worth pursuing and worth avoiding) are "moral reasons". \
\
\
## Is virtue knowledge objectively valuable? \
\
The strength of this picture of practical reason is what some will consider a weakness. On this picture, practical reasoning is not just a procedural process, but a substantive one. That is, we do not reason about means solely, but also about ends. Indeed, on this picture, practical reasoning is defined as an orientation to practice in pursuit of apparent goods and in avoidance of apparent evils. As Aquinas says, "This is the first precept of [practical reason], that 'good is to be done and pursued, and evil is to be avoided.'^[@aquinas, IIa. Q.94. Art. 2.]\
\
\
### practical reason is motivation\
\
I argued that practical reasons can, by themselves, be motives. But we I will go further: practical reasons are the *primary* meaning of the term 'motive'. Other psychological states such as hungers, thirsts, loves, fears, *move* me to action the same way that such states move non-rational organisms. For rational animals, only reasons *motivate* me to act, since motivation is (I argue) a fundamentally rational state. \
\
\
### practical reason is end-goal activity\
\
Foot is persuaded that we must assume a definition of practical reasoning that is substantive, rather than merely procedural. Practical reasoning does not just aim at means to ends, nor does it merely aim at "ends"; it aims at *the apparent good*. \
\
>This now seems to me to be the correct way of meeting the challenge that I myself issued in \'91Morality as a System of Hypothetical Imperatives\'92 and at that time despaired of meeting: namely, to show the rationality of acting, even against desire and self\uc0\u8208 interest, on a demand of morality. The argument depends on the change of direction that Quinn suggested: seeing goodness as setting a necessary condition of practical rationality and therefore as at least a part\u8208 determinant of the thing itself. Nor is this a quite unfamiliar way of arguing. Many of us are willing to reject a \'91present desire\'92 theory of reasons for action because we think that someone who knowingly puts his future health at risk for a trivial pleasure is behaving foolishly, and therefore not well. Seeing his will as defective, we therefore say that he is doing what he has reason not to do. Being unable to fit the supposed \'91reason\'92 into some preconceived present\u8208 desire\u8208 based theory of reasons for action, we do not query whether it really is a foolish way to behave, but rather hang on to the evaluation and shape our theory of reasons accordingly. And it is exactly a generalization of this presumption about the direction of the argument on which I am now insisting. For what, we may ask, is so special about prudence that it alone among the virtues should be reasonably thought to relate to practical rationality in such a way? [@foot2001natural 63]\
\
If goodness is a "necessary condition of practical rationality" then we are already committed to a substantive view of practical reason, rather than a merely procedural neo-Humean view. \
\
One of the best reasons to think practical reason is end-oriented and substantive rather than merely procedural is that practical reason is important. \
\
Foot identifies an argument for the importance of practical rationality on the basis that *we cannot help but value it*. Foot follows Quinn's lead in criticising a view of reason that makes the goal "the maximal satisfaction of an agent's desires and preferences, suitably corrected for the effects of misinformation, wishful thinking, and the like."[@quinn1992rationality] The trouble, Foot says, is that we *cannot consistently believe this view.*\
\
>He pointed out that by this account, practical reason, which would concern only the relation of means to ends, would therefore be indifferent to nastiness or even disgracefulness in an agent's purposes. And Quinn asked, in the crucial sentence of the article, *what then would be so important about practical rationality?* In effect he is pointing to our taken\uc0\u8208 for\u8208 granted, barely noticed assumption that practical rationality has the status of a kind of master virtue, in order to show that we cannot in consistency with ourselves think that the Humean account of it is true.[@foot2001natural 62]\
\
\
\
}