{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## Irrelevance of biology to practical reason\
\
\
Two related problems remain. The first is called the "Irrelevance" problem; the second is the "Polyanna" problem. (A third problem will be addressed in a later chapter.) Let's state each problem in a bit more detail. \
\
\
### Irrelevance problem\
\
Being a bearer of the human life form means each of us is subject to the needs of food, shelter, and community like any other animal. Thus far, I have argued that these needs are natural norms. But the objection states that such norms are not ethically relevant, \
\
Even if "natural norms" such as those argued for in the previous chapter existed, this objection says, they would be irrelevant from the practical point of view.[@frey. Her dissertation is a full-scale rebuttal of this objection. I shall only cursorily review some of her arguments.]   \
\
A couple of common examples of natural normativity are food and sex. As animals, most people find themselves subject to hunger, thirst, and the desire for delicous foods. But morality impinges on these biological urges and requires that we eat at certain times and in certain ways and not others. Some of us "snack" when we are not hungry in the pursuit of pleasure; and others starve ourselves even when we are hungry in the pursuit of a particular body image. \
\
Furthermore, as animals, most people find themselves subject to the urgings of their sexual nature. But morality seems to require that we do not act on these urgings every time they arise. Copulation should only be done in certain circumstances and is restricted by the claims of fidelity and propriety. And even when sexual union is morally appropriate, reproductive technologies allow people to choose if and when they want to conceive children.\
\
In short, the biological aspect of human nature (including natural norms such as the urge to eat, drink, copulate) is irrelevant to the practical rational aspect because one is able, by virtue of rationality, to transcend one's nature.  \
\
\
### Polyanna\
The Polyanna problem is a related problem in this vicinity.[@lott2012moral]  This may be understood as the temptation to wink at the evils of human behavior in the effort to paint a portrait that is falsely full of sweetness and light. \
\
Human norms are discoverable and demonstrable both practical and relevant. Are we obligated to fulfill all such norms? Just some? How are they to be distinguished from unethical, vile behaviors also statistically common among human behaviors? Empirically, some acorns become fully grown, mature oaks, but other acorns become stulted, sickly specimens. Most acorns never become anything other than acorns before they disintegrate into dust in the soil.  So statistical majorities will not do the trick. Likewise, norms can be discovered for both good and evil: Some animals protect their young while other animals abandon or even consume their young. Some humans are kind and gentle while others are vicious and cruel.  Anscombe anticipates this worry when she says: \
\
>The search for "norms" might lead someone to look for laws of nature, as if the universe were a legislator; but in the present day this is not likely to lead to good results: it might lead one to eat the weaker according to the laws of nature, but would hardly lead anyone nowadays to notions of justice.[@anscombe1958 14] \
\
Suppose we pick out certain biological urges as ethically relevant "natural norms". Why those and not others? Is there any justification or is it prejudging a moral judgment?  Put differently, even if human norms are discoverable, will they be *good*? Will they not be a mixed bag of good and apparently evil norms? Will we not need something else, such as conscience, or divine revelation, over and above these human laws, by which to judge which ones are normative for us? \
\
Can we move from vague statements such as "human beings are language users" to particular moral statements: 'Human beings make and keep promises'?\
\
\
## Framing the dilemma\
\
McDowell urges that the is-ought gap is indeed a real problem, in so far as the "is" side of the gap (the biological side) is irrelevant to morality. He views this as an the over-zealous application of empirical methods to ethics. \
\
>The irrelevancy objection is a more sophisticated presentation of the so-called \'91naturalistic fallacy.\'92  But rather than crudely rejecting any move from \'91is\'92 to \'91ought\'92, it merely blocks the inference at one crucial juncture\'97the inference from the \'91is\'92 of the species, to the \'91ought\'92 that governs the rational will.\
\
## A solution: Wisdom and practical ends\
\
My thesis is that it requires some measure of practical wisdom to recognize which natural norms (derived from our nature as practical rational animals) are ethically relevant but that such wisdom aligns with the external, scientific viewpoint. \
\
I can know that a certain beam of electromagnetic energy is of such-and-such a wavelength by observing it with scientific instruments *and* by looking at it with my eyes and having a perceptual experience of redness. \
\
The "scientific" point of view is a view of things as they stand in the theoretical order or the realm of law. However, this point of view is not exclusive of the internal point of view, where things exist in the practical order or the space of reasons.\
\
Indeed, the realm of law is within the space of reasons. That is, the scientific point of view is not the point of view *from within* the space of law but *about* the space of law *from within* the space of reasons. The scientist looks at wavelengths as a practical reasoner just as much as he or she looks at potentially fruitful research projects as a practical reasoner. \
\
## Frey\
\
\
\
>First, I consider his theory of will.  There are two main respects in which his theory of will is useful to resolving our dilemma.  First, it is an account of the will as a natural inclination or tendency that has the exemplification of form as its end.  So the will has a natural standard of goodness or badness, which is supplied by the life form as such.  Second, the will is a rational power, and its objects are determined through acts of practical reasoning.  Thus we can only attain our end (the exemplification of our form) through acts of reason.  The will then is a natural inclination towards the exemplification of form that necessarily pursues its objects under the formal aspect of the universal good, through particular judgments of practical reason.  This will is thus a power of self-determination.  But this self-determination is not total.  To see why it is not, I turn to Aquinas\'92s account of practical reason.  The starting points or first principles of practical reasons are the natural ends that are constitutive of human life.  Practical reason presupposes ends, and our most general ends are constitutive of our form of life, and so shared in common by all mature, sane members of the species.  Aquinas thinks that we have rational knowledge of these ends qua ends\'97we have a kind of natural-practical knowledge of them.  Such knowledge is natural because all human beings have a natural disposition to acquire this knowledge; such knowledge is practical because the knowledge is of the end qua end\'97we know these ends as objects to be realized, and not as facts.  This practical knowledge of our ends is compatible with the self-conscious and self-determined character of a power of reason because it is still necessary for the agent to order these ends, to determine the specific manner in which they will be attained, and by what means.  On this account, self-determination (and thus free choice) is in the space between the general ends and the particular manner in which we realize them.[@frey2014how 20-1]    \
\
\
\
>The concept of principle at play in \'93first principle\'94 is not familiar.  We will be led astray if we think of it as a merely formal principle or imperative.  Aquinas, following Aristotle once again, thinks of first principles of reason as its \'93starting points.\'94  For practical reason, the starting points are the ends that constitute that for the sake of which the power of practical reason comes to be and operates: the life form as such.  So, the starting points of practical reason\'97that towards which it strives in its operation\'97are the ends constitutive of human life.  Aquinas identifies these ends: life, knowledge, friendship, family, political society, and so on.  Aquinas thinks that the human mind is naturally apt to know these ends as ends\'97as objects of pursuit, and thus as good.  And thus he says that the will is naturally inclined to them. \
Aquinas thinks that we must presuppose such starting points, because practical reason presupposes that something is already generally wanted. [@frey2014how 32]\
\
### Explaining vice\
\
We should not take the difficulty of discerning which 'natural' impulses and qualities are virtuous and rational as a weakness. \
\
It seems rather to me a strength. It allows for Hesiod's insight:\
\
"Vice in abundance is easy to get;\
The road is smooth and begins beside you,\
But the gods have put sweat between us and virtue."^[*Works and Days* 287-9, quoted in *Republic* II, 364c.]\
\
Many people are irrational. Many people are not virtuous. But that is just to say that many people are imperfectly human, and not just by bad luck or misfortune; they are imperfectly actuating the human life form by making bad choices, being ill-informed, being lazy, being greedy. \
\
Just as health leads to more health (a healthy organeism can eat, digest, and exercise better than its sick counterpart), virtue leads to more virtue (a diligent person is liable to become patient), vice leads to more vice (a lazy person is liable to become impatient). We ought to take care, at the earliest ages, to ensure the zealous cultivation of virtues in ourselves and others.}