{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
## Reason and Nature\
g. Is rationality natural and is nature rational? That is the monism objection, or idealism objection. \
\
\
b. What is the relation of practical rationality to one's nature as an animal or organism?  Have we left organic nature behind? This is the irrelevance objection. \
\
12. I have argued that virtues are "merely" human, but also argued that that human nature is normative; therefore, the proposition that virtues are normative is deduced from the major premise. There are still problems to be solved; specifically the relation between reason and nature. \
\
\
The two sorts are what I have called Organic Naturalism and Practical Naturalism. (Julia Annas draws the same distinction in terms of biological and rational.) As we have already seen, virtue ethicists tend to pick one or the other, or vacillate between one and the other, or try to bridge the apparent gap between them. Where they can agree is that somehow human nature, our nature as practical reasoning animals, must have normativity 'built-in' so to speak. When Christopher Toner, for example, draws out same distinction between the kinds of naturalism, he agrees with Hursthouse that the term 'Aristotelian naturalism' "implies that human nature is normative, such that to be morally good is to fulfill one's nature."[@toner2008sorts 221.] \
\
The question is just how to do that. Is human nature just another example of a biological nature, like chimpanzees and dolphins, subject to evaluation by the same patterns of normativity? Or is humanity something quite different, on account of our rational self-awareness and practical agency? \
\
Annas says this: \
\
>What is so helpful for ethics from this kind of biological naturalism is that we find that the normativity of our ethical discourse is not something which emerges mysteriously with humans and can only be projected back, in an anthropomorphic way, onto trees and their roots. Rather, we find normativity in the realm of living things, plants and animals, already. It is part of the great merit of the work of Philippa Foot and Rosalind Hursthouse to have stressed this point. Like many important philosophical points, it is obvious once pointed out\'85\'94 (Annas 1996).\
\
By uniting evaluations of humans and other (non-human) living things into a single coherent account, Foot\'92s cognitivism solves many interesting problems in moral semantics. Moral language does not, after all, have a special linguistic function. If she does not solve them definitively, she goes a long way to putting the burden of proof back on those who wish to deny the appearances. \
\
Those who deny the appearances appeal to the special feature of evaluative that it is motivating or action-causing. This problem of the \'93motivational gap\'94 between normative facts and descriptive facts \'93might be the problem of ethics\'94 (Brown 2008, 95). This is the second way I shall build on her theory. I shall endorse and defend her alternate explanation of the \'93action-guiding character of morality\'94 \'97 that is, the very old but not very fashionable thesis that \'93acting morally is part of practical rationality\'94 (Foot 2008, 9). \
}