{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## Intro to practical reason\
\
Jay Wallace defines practical reason generally enough for us to use his definition as a starting point: "Practical reason is the general human capacity for resolving, through reflection, the question of what one is to do."[@seppracticalreason] We practically reason generally about how to live, and specifically about what to do. We do this by reflecting on action, by evaluating good and bad, and by identifying *practical reasons* -- that is, reasons to \uc0\u966  or not to \u966 . \
\
The hypothesis developed in discussing the natural normativity of human nature lead us to predict that virtues would bear an important relationship to such practical reasoning. I argued above that such practical rationality defines our nature. We are animals of a particular sort: practical rational animals. We identify ourselves (scientifically, philosophically, religiously, anthropologically, psychologically) as creatures normally capable of language, abstract thought, argumentation, mathematics, philosophy, natural science, and so on. But we are not merely rational; we are also practical: we *practice*. One can conceive of rational creatures (gods, martians, angelic intelligences, artificial intelligences) that are not also "practical" creatures -- that do not practice anything. Douglas Adams's computer character Deep Thought is a *knower* with nothing to do. Hence the problem of practical reason is the problem of human nature: These are the two sides of the same paradox about our human nature. We are "embodied minds in action"[@hanna2009embodied] or "psychological animals."[@bailey2015animalism] So, if human nature is to be potentially a practical, rational animal. And human excellence or virtue is to be a mature practical rational animal, to actuate that potentiality. Insofar as practical rationality is a special function of human animals who speak, self-reflect, and live in communities, virtues would be somehow excellences relating to speech, self-reflection and society. \
\
The problem to be addressed is this: Is practical reason both *practical* and *rational*? Two related problems we must address are really two sides of the same problem. If practical reason is really practical, then how is it rational? And if it is rational, how is it really practical? In other words, if practical reasoning is by definition a kind of knowledge, and knowledge cannot (by itself) motivate to action, then practical reasons (including moral reasons) cannot motivate. But if practical reasoning is by definition a kind of motivation or action-guiding force, then it can motivate but it is no longer a form of knowledge -- practical reason isn't reasonable. In a very real sense, the primary challenge of this chapter is to *defend the very concept of practical reason*. \
\
While this discussion of practical reason will hopefully solve some of the problems of the previous chapter, it will bring to the surface new problems.  Is such practical reasoning knowledge "objective", subjective, intersubjective, or some combination of these?\
\
1. **Subjectivity Puzzle**. Are values subjective? Are there as many rationalities as there are reasoners?  Is practical reason subjective or expressivistic, like taste?\
\
2. Irrelevance problem\
\
2.  **Intersubjectivity Puzzle**. If values are not subjective, are they intersubjective or objective? Is practical rationality culturally relative? In other words, although there is one human nature, expressed variously in different cultures, languages, customs, and thoughts -- are we forced to give up on the idea of *one human rationality*, albeit expressed variously? Is there, at bottom, a plurality of *rationalities*? Is practical reason intersubjective, like etiquette?\
\
3. **Rationality/Nature Criterion**. What is the relationship between reasons for action and nature? Or are reasons only "in here" in us, psychological and rational, in which case humans are not natural? Or are reasons for acting "out there" in the world, not physical and not natural, in which case nature is normative? If so, is this naturalism? Is this view objective idealism? Is practical reason natural?\
\
\
6. Practical wisdom and practical reasons are not subjective.  I shall contend that there is one rationality, although it is a one-over-many concept that is capacious. This practical reason is most likely not subjective. My case for this very difficult conclusion rests on the belief, virtually incorrigible, that practical reason is *important*. It is of unquestionable intrinsic value to human beings. Furthermore, insofar as virtue is relative to rationality, rationality itself must be fixed to preserve moral realism. A practical reason can and does motivate one, all by itself; in conjunction with or absent other immediate inclinations or desires. Practical reason, furthermore, motivates when one judges that a course of action or an outcome is good in itself, that it is *desirable* in the sense that it is to be desired whether one presently desires it or not.}