{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## How should one live? Two kinds of reason, two kinds of morality: prudential and moral\
\
\
In order to address these questions, I would like to explore McDowell's account of virtue as knowledge. His first claim is that the "point of engaging in ethical reflection... lies in the interest of the question 'How should one live?'"[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] \
\
Before we look at McDowell's answer, let's frame the discussion. The familiar way of framing the "how should one live?" question is this. There are two sorts of motives that drive everyone: prudential reasons and moral reasons. Prudential reasons incline one to look out for oneself. One is naturally, selfishly inclined to pursue one's own happiness or well-being.  On the other hand, moral reasons drive one to look out for others. One is morally constrainted to do one's duty, sometimes in accord with, but often against one's inclinations. Kant (or the stereotypical figure in the literature whom people call "Kant") presents morality as a particular set of reasons (all deriving from the moral law) that obligate one to do what is right, whether or not it is prudential. Otherwise, so long as one is doing one's duty, one can answer the "how should one live?" question with a list of prudential considerations: get a good job, save for retirement, eat healthy foods, exercise, make friends, and so on.\
\
Within this familiar frame, morality becomes especially pressing at the moment of moral dilemmas. Edmund Pincoffs distinguishes two broad conceptions of philosophical ethics he calls \'93Quandary Ethics\'94 and \'93Character Ethics.\'94 Quandary ethics is focused on the short-term resolution of immediate moral problems, either by dissolving moral perplexity or giving some (hopefully rational) basis for a particular decision or course of action. The Quandary ethicists are those Pincoffs quotes at the beginning of his article (such as Hare, Toulon, Brandt). They think that:\
\
>The business of ethics is to clarify and solve "problems", i.e. situations in which it is difficult to know what one should do; that the ultimate beneficiary of ethical analysis is the person who, in one of these situations, seeks rational ground for the decision he must make; that ethics is therefore primarily concerned to find such grounds, often conceived of as moral rules and the principles from which they can be derived; and that meta-ethics consists in the analysis of the terms, claims, and arguments which come into play in moral disputation, deliberation, and justification in problematic contexts.[@pincoffs1971quandary 552. Cf. @macintyre1984does] \
\
By contrast, character ethics is focused on the long-term goal of living well by executing worthwhile goals in every day life.  Aristotle is an example of a Character Ethicist. Aristotle:\
\
>...thought of ethics as a branch of politics, which in turn he thought of as a very wide-ranging subject having to do generally with the planning of human life so that it could be lived as well as possible. Moral problems are given their due but are by no means stage-centre. The question is not so much how we should resolve perplexities as how we should live.[@pincoffs1971quandary 553-4] \
\
These two broad conceptions correlate to two conceptions of moral reasons. It might seem that moral reasons are distinct from non-moral reasons (such as prudential, aesthetic, egoistic reasons etc.). \
\
Let the Quandary ethicist represent the view of moral reasons as special, perhaps overriding, kinds of reasons pertaining to the rights, obligations, or duties of one individual in relation to others. Even in asking the "how do I live?" question, a Quandary ethicist is likely assuming that the answer will include a set of moral reasons weighed against or in opposition to non-moral reasons (such as prudential reasons). As Martha Nussbaum points out, a Quandary ethicist might ask \'93how do specifically moral ends and commitments figure among the ends that [a moral agent] pursues?\'94 But she clarifies: \
\
>This question is posed in a characteristically modern way, presupposing a distinction between the moral and the non-moral that is not drawn, as such, by the Greek thinkers. But if one objects to that characterization, one can rephrase it: for example, What role does concern for others for their own sake play in here scheme of ends? What role does political justice play in her scheme of ends? And so forth.\'94[@nussbaum1999virtue 174] \
\
Foot makes a similar point in distinguishing our sense of 'moral' from the older sense.\
\
>Many if not most moral philosophers in modern times see their subject as having to do exclusively with relations between individuals or between an individual and society, and so with such things as obligations, duties, and charitable acts... \'91moral\'92 and \'91prudential\'92 considerations [are] contrasted in a way that was alien to Plato or Aristotle.[@foot2001natural 68] \
\
There is a powerful social and psychological force to the distinction between moral and prudential, other-regarding and self-regarding,[@slote1995agent] altruistic and egoistic[@nagel1978possibility], benevolent and selfish, conscience and self-love.[@annas2009egoism; @macintyre1967egoism; @bloomfield2012eudaimonia; @huang2010self]  It results in a bifurcation between two kinds of reason. And certainly considerations about myself are conceptually distinct from considerations about my family, my friend, my society, or my species. \
\
The question of how to live is a question about practical reasons. But what kind? Are moral reasons are *one type* of practical reason, or does any practical reason count as a "moral" reason (broadly construed)?[@foot2002virtues chapter 13, "Are Moral Reasons Overriding?"; Cf. also @mcdowell1978moral] Suppose a greeting card or an internet meme recommends that you "live well, love hard, and laugh often." Is this platitude aiming to provide you with a moral reason, a practical reason, a prudential reason, an aesthetic reason, or something else?}