{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red53\green53\blue53;\red220\green161\blue13;}
\deftab560
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 >And there is indeed much in Kant to suggest that, although he shares with Aristotle the view that we have not just one, but two principles of movement, in other respects his philosophical psychology is Humean. He seems committed to the view that our emotions or inclinations are no part of our rationality. They come from the non\uc0\u8208 rational, animal side of our nature; if they happen to prompt us to act in accordance with the judgements of reason about what ought to be done we are lucky; if they incline us against them we find life difficult, but their prompting us in the right direction is no mark or indication of their rationality. The emotions are not rational in any way.[@hursthouse1998virtue 109]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
>How very unlike the other animals human beings are when they endure agony, and risk their lives, for justice and truth, or are terrified by the prospect of university examinations; when they are ready to die for glory, but tremble at the prospect of humiliation. The emotion that in the other animals is essentially connected to physical self\uc0\u8208 preservation or preservation of the species can be transformed in human beings into an emotion connected with the preservation of what is 
\i best
\i0 , most worth preserving, in us and our species. And the correctness (or incorrectness) of our view of that is an aspect of our rationality.[@hursthouse1998virtue 111]\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >Another fault of Williams's predecessors and ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.oxfordscholarship.com.ezproxy.uky.edu/view/10.1093/0199247994.001.0001/acprof-9780199247998-bibliography-1#acprof-9780199247998-bibItem-124"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 1965}}) contemporaries was that, though concentrating on \'91the most general features of .\'a0.\'a0. evaluative language\'92, they failed to think about the fact that such language has to be taught, and thereby failed to think about moral education and upbringing. We are taught to use sentences which contain the words (equivalent to) \'91good\'92 and \'91evil\'92 and their cognates and species from a very early age, at the same time as we are taught how to conduct ourselves. And a central aspect of this teaching is the training of the emotions.[@hursthouse1998virtue 113]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >For the kind of discriminating detail which makes the vague remark into a plausible and illuminating thesis, the best source is still Aquinas, not just in 
\i Summa Theologiae
\i0  Ia2ae (QQ. 22\'9630) on \'91The Emotions\'92, but all through IIa2ae (QQ. 1\'96189) on hope, fear, despair, charity (
\i caritas
\i0 ), joy, hatred, 
\i accidie
\i0 , envy, anger, curiosity, etc. Descartes, in 
\i The Passions of the Soul
\i0 , gives a rather watered\uc0\u8208 down but still instructive version.[@hursthouse1998virtue chapter 5, footnote 2]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >It is, I think, true, that where Aristotle, and thereby the Aristotelians, have an edge over Kant (and, indeed, Hume) with respect to the moral significance of the emotions is in the account Aristotle gives us of human rationality, an account that allows the emotions to participate in reason and thereby play their proper role in the specification of full virtue. Much modern moral philosophy, deontological and utilitarian, has followed Kant, or Hume, rather than Aristotle, on human rationality, and thereby still suffers from the fault to which Anscombe drew attention back in 1958\'97it lacks \'91an adequate philosophy of psychology\'92.[@hursthouse1998virtue 119.]\
\
}