{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red16\green16\blue16;\red43\green23\blue133;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 >
\f1\fs26 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The tendency to linger in debates over cloning and enhancement on what is \'91natural\'92 to humans should be abandoned (see also Buchanan \cf3 2009\cf2 ). It either constitutes an irrelevant preamble to the important question of which features of human reproduction should be preserved, or it constitutes an objectionable allusion to some mythical and morally loaded \'91human nature\'92 that might serve as an ethical yardstick in debates of this sort. What is more, the fact that we seem to be intuitive Aristotelians about species natures in general should make us particularly wary of the resonances of framing debates about enhancement in terms of claims about human nature. Our tendency is not merely to understand claims about human nature as casual statistical truths about human populations, with no particular ethical significance, but instead as descriptions of an underlying, normatively laden, internal essence we all share.[@lewens2012human 473] 
\fs24 \cf0 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs26 \cf2 >Another way of posing this problem draws once again on empirical research. The folk do indeed take it that there are internal essences for each species. However, they also seem to hold that there are internal essences for other living categories, including sexes and races (see Gelman and Hirschfeld \cf3 1999 \cf2 for references and discussion). This reminds us that biological species are not the only things that can play the role of subjects in Thompson\'92s natural historical judgements.[@lewens2012human 469]\
Lewens' worry here is a widespread one, but erroneous nonetheless. He suggests but does not quite say that philosophically defending the folk view that essences are real for species *necessarily* leads to stereotyping social groups, races, classes, and so on. The innuendo is unstated but plain: belief in essences is racist(!) The response can be stated just as plainly and without innuendo: belief in essences is rather obviously the only defense against racism. In all cultures, foreigners are teased and mocked for being different. Only the firm conviction, maintained on moral grounds even against one's inclination, that the person different from oneself is at the end of the day *a human being just like oneself* can quell and perhaps even eradicate racism. Furthermore, even if essences can be abused by the creation of stereotypes, they do not *necessarily* lead to unjust stereotyping. Fast cars do not necessitate fatal car wrecks but do allow them. \

\fs24 \cf0 \
\
\

\fs26 \cf2 "\'85empirical research supports the notion that the folk are committed to the existence of species-specific teleo-essences\'85"[@lewens2012human 469]\
My argument is that the folk view is mostly correct. As a defeasible presumption, it needs a good case before it is overturned. And the only case I know of is just that materialism disallows telco-essences. So much the worse for materialism. }