{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 One of the earliest extant products of human culture is an ancient Sumerian book of wisdom. The *Instructions of Shuruppak* provides a king's instructions to his son on everything on how to farm, to how to run a household, to how to drink responsibly. Or rather, not to do anything else while drinking: "You should not pass judgment when you drink beer." (126) \
\
To modern ears, this foregin advice falls into one of three categories. Some of the advice seems to me pretty well timeless: "A drunkard will drown the harvest" (221). Or "You should not speak improperly; later it will lay a trap for you" (42-43).\
\
Some of the advice sounds tinny or offensive to modern ears, reflecting the author's patriarchal culture ("A woman with her own property ruins the house" (220)) or his Sumerian religion ("Praise be to the lady who completed the great tablets, the maiden Nisaba...!" (278)). Finally, some of the advice is difficult to judge. "You should not buy a donkey which brays; it will split your midriff." Is this good advice? I don't know.\
\
The same can be said of other wisdom books, like the *Upanishads*, the Book of Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, the Analects, and so on. Some of the wisdom seems rooted to the particular context of the culture, some of it is opaque to us, and some of it still seems applicable. \
\
What is important to observe about such wisdom literature is that, regardless of which culture examples are plucked from, the virtuous person is defined by his or her conformity to a framework of practical reasoning. The virtuous person is successful (a) in speech, (b) in social relationships, (c) in practical reasoning about what to do in specific situations and how to live well in general, and (d) in providing for the basic animal necessities of human life. \
\
By my hypothesis thus far, this sort of framework is exactly right. If our nature is to be practical, rational animals, we should expect that the virtues are not only morally praiseworthy excellent practices but also a certain kind of excellence with respect to thinking and reasoning. Practical rationality and animality are two sides of the same paradox about our human nature. Excellence must be physical and psychological because we are "embodied minds in action"[@hanna2009embodied] or "psychological animals."[@bailey2015animalism] }