{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 ##David Enoch \'97 Taking Morality Seriously \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
Another recent thinker who has advanced a thesis with some similarities is Israeli philosopher David Enoch. David Enoch's persuasive argument is that any alternative to objectivist moral realism, whatever its merits, doesn't account for or allow us to take morality sufficiently seriously -- as seriously as we already do, or as seriously as we must do \'97 especially for deliberation about what to do. Moral realism of the robust sort gains its plausibility from allowing or explaining why we take morality just so seriously -- as serious as life and death. \
\
Enoch's claim is not the same as Nagel's, but bears an important relation: Nagel claims that reasoning as if morality were objective is practically necessary, that we cannot but do so. Enoch claims that since we reason as if morality were objective (we take it very seriously) we ought to explain the fact by the best explanation, namely that morality is indeed objective. \
\
I take these claims together to be an explanandum and explanans. There are many ways of trying to convince people to take morality less seriously, by showing it up, by exposing it, deflating it, showing what moral claims "really" amount to, and so on. Peter Railton claims that some people can take morality too seriously even though they are avowed subjectivists. He says \
\
\'93Some may be drawn to, or repelled by, moral realism out of a sense that it is the view of ethics that best expresses high moral earnestness. Yet one can be serious about morality, even to a fault, without being a moral realist. Indeed, a possible objection to the sort of moral realism I will defend here is that it may not make morality serious enough\'94 (Railton, \'93Moral Realism\'94 164). \
\
An objection Enoch might make (or that I shall make in a Enochian spirit) is that there are two kinds of earnestness. One is an earnestness in doing good. The other is an inevitable earnestness in caring about what we do when we deliberate. Enoch emphasises the second. Railton\'92s non-reductive but naturalistic morality may account for the fact that people sincerely and eagerly care about doing right but it doesn\'92t account for the way we in fact deliberate. \
Enoch summarizes his moral realism in this way: \
\
>"I believe that there are irreducibly normative truths and facts, facts such that we should care about our future well-being, that we should not humiliate other people, that we should not reason and form beliefs in ways we know to be unreliable. These are, of course, just examples: even if I am wrong about them, I believe there must be some examples of this sort, examples of normative (and indeed moral) truths that are irreducibly normative, truths that are perfectly objective, universal, absolute. They are independent of us, our desires and our (or anyone else\'92s) will. And our thinking and talking about them amounts not just to an expression of any practical attitudes, but to a representation of these normative truths and facts. These normative truths are truths that, when successful in our normative inquiries, we discover rather than create or construct. They are, in other words, just as respectable as empirical or mathematical truths (at least, that is, according to scientific and mathematical realists)." \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ##David Enoch Chapter 3 - Argument from Deliberative Indespensibility\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
Enoch\'92s book defends moral realism against various familiar or not-so-familiar objections. His primary positive argument for moral realism (or what he calls \'93robust moral realism\'94) is, in short, that normative facts feature indispensibly in our deliberation and tha the reality of normative facts is the best explanation of that indispensability. He says, \'93 I argue that irreducibly normative truths, though not explanatorily indispensable, are nevertheless deliberatively indispensable \'96 they are, in other words, indispensable for the project of deliberating and deciding what to do \'96 and that this kind of indispensability is just as respectable as the more familiar explanatory kind. Deliberative indispensability, I argue, justifies belief in normative facts, just like the explanatory indispensability of theoretical entities like electrons justifies belief in electrons.\'94 (Enoch 2011, 50; Enoch 50)\
\
We can trace a prototypical version of this argument from deliberative indespensibility to Plato\'92s Parmenides.  In this most difficult of Platonic texts, Parmenides (the character) advances \'93the most difficult\'94 objections to realism about universals, and despite Socrates (the character)\'92s inability to respond to them, affirms realism. Why? In the absence of appropriate rebuttals of objections, why retain the belief? Because the alternative thesis is impossible to rationally maintain. \
\
\'93But on the other hand,\'94 said Parmenides, \'93if anyone, with his mind fixed on all these objections and others like them, denies the existence of ideas of things, and does not assume an idea under which each individual thing is classed, he will be quite at a loss,  since he denies that the idea of each thing is always the same, and in this way he will utterly destroy the power of carrying on discussion. You seem to have been well aware of this.\'94 \'93Quite true,\'94 he said.\'93Then what will become of philosophy? To what can you turn, if these things are unknown?\'94 (134-135c). \
\
Philosophical theories that are self-refuting or doctrines which are sets of propositions of which some contradict each other are theoretically impossible to affirm. Similarly, practical maxims that are self-refuting are impossible to act upon. Reality (formal reality) is what philosophical inquiry is about.  If philosophical inquiry is just about our shared concepts, or just about the history of falsehoods held by great dead philosophers, or just about rationality itself, then we had better use our time elsewhere. \
\
Enoch doesn\'92t think that there have been any good or good enough response to Gilbert Harman\'92s challenge that unless normative facts can feature in our best explanations. \'93The general thought seems clear enough: moral facts do not play an appropriate explanatory role (the No Explanatory Role Thesis), and, given that playing such a role is necessary for justified belief in the existence of a kind of fact (the Explanatory Requirement), we are not justified in believing in moral facts\'94  (Enoch 52). In a footnote, Enoch distinguishes his account from that of Regan: \'93An emphasis on the point of view of the deliberating agent \'96 central to my employment of the second strategy of coping with Harman\'92s Challenge \'96 can be found in Regan (2003) and Rosati (2003). At times, Regan\'92s claims are very close to my own, except he thinks such line of thought only defends realism \'93for practical purposes\'94 (2003, 656).\
\
Enoch addresses a preliminary worry or objection that something\'92s indespensibility need not signify its truth or reality. But the same (or indistinguishably similar) worry would have to be applied to electrons and numbers. Rather, he appeals to the properly basic procedure of concluding that something exists on the basis of its indispensability to certain kinds of explanation. \'93We usually take that something is theoretically useful to be reason to believe it, and perhaps we should rest content with that as a fairly basic epistemic procedure, as one place where epistemic justification comes to an end.\'94 Enoch defends the proposition that inference to the best explanation is a properly basic epistemic procedure, like relying on modus ponens or perception or memory. \
\
\
Enoch distinguishes explanatory indispensability from deliberative indispensabilty, which he explains this way:  \'93Something is instrumentally indispensable for a project, I suggest, just in case it cannot be eliminated without undermining (or at least sufficiently diminishing) whatever reason we had to engage in that project in the first place; without, in other words, thereby defeating whatever reason we had to find that project attractive\'94 (69).\
\
In short: \'93The deliberative project is, then, intrinsically indispensable (or at least \'96 it is intrinsically indispensable if the explanatory one is). If it is instrumentally indispensable for the deliberative project that p, we are justified in believing that p. At least, we are every bit as justified in so believing as we are in believing the conclusions of inferences to the best explanation (from warranted premises). If, then, it can be established that irreducibly normative truths are deliberatively indispensable, we are every bit as justified in believing in them as we are in believing in the explanation-friendliness of the universe, and, derivatively, in electrons\'94 (71).\
\
Terence Cuneo explores indispensability in this way: \
An \'93elimination stopper\'94 is something that is \'93necessary for engaging in anything we would ordinarily recognize as theorizing\'94 (Cuneo 229). \
\'93Theorizing\'97that is, accepting, evaluating, and formulating theories (however inchoate in character) of various kinds\'97is arguably an unavoidable practice for ordinary human agents; it is difficult to imagine a recognizably human way of life in which we do not engage in it. If this is right, it follows that epistemic facts are indispensable in at least this sense: They are such that participation in certain practices that are themselves practically unavoidable commits us to their existence.1\'94\
	Certain epistemic norms are just so indispensable. \
\
\
Enoch then argues that deliberation is just so indispensable. There are arbitrary choices (between this or that cereal) and there are choices where the outcome really just depends on you or your choice (how happy will I be in profession X?) But in deliberating we \'93attempt to eliminate arbitrariness by discovering (normative) reasons, and it is impossible in a believe absence of such reasons to be discovered\'94 (74). In some cases of choosing, you \'93commit yourself to there being (normative) reasons relevant to your deliberation. \
\
One review summarizes the argument in this way: \
\
(1) Moral beliefs concern something objective. (2) If Robust normative facts are indispensable for deliberation, we have some reason to believe in them, and thus to accept Robust Metanormative Realism. (3) Insofar as we have reason to accept Robust Metanormative Realism, we have reason to accept Robust Metaethical Realism. (4) Robust normative facts are indispensable for deliberation because alternatives to Robust Realism that are consistent with (1) and with normativity\'92s role in deliberation fail. (5) None of the metaphysical, epistemological, semantic or psychological objections to Robust Realism are significantly damaging. (6) Therefore, we have most reason to accept Robust Realism in both metaethics and metanormative theory. (David Faraci\'92s review, accessed online http://personal.bgsu.edu/~faracid/pubs/enoch.pdf\page \
 I argue that iexplrreducibly normative truths, though not explanatorily indispensable, are nevertheless deliberatively indispensable \'96 they are, in other words, indispensable for the project of deliberating and deciding what to do \'96 and that this kind of indispensability is just as respectable as the more familiar explanatory kind. Deliberative indispensability, I argue, justifies belief in normative facts, just like the explanatory indispensability of theoretical entities like electrons justifies belief in electrons. \
\
##David Enoch, Chapter 4 - And Now, Robust Metaethical Realism\
\
Enoch argues that moral normativity is a species of normativity, and that the distinction between normative and non-normative is much more important than the distinction between moral norm and non-moral norm. \
\
\'93With this point in mind, then, asking about the relations between the moral and the normative becomes the question of how to delineate the moral within the normative. What more, in other words, does it take for a normative truth (or falsehood) to qualify as moral? Morality is a particular instance of normativity, and so we are now in effect asking about its distinctive characteristics, the ones that serve to distinguish between the moral and the rest of the normative.\
I do not have a view on these special characteristics of the moral. In fact, I think that for most purposes this is not a line worth worrying about. The distinction within the normative between the moral and the non-moral seems to me to be shallow compared to the distinction between the normative and the non-normative \'96 both philosophically, as I am about to argue, and practically. (Once you know you have a reason to \uc0\u1092  and what this reason is, does it really matter for your deliberation whether it qualifies as a moral reason?)\'94 (Enoch 86). \
\
His argument does not depend essentially on distinguishing moral norms from non-moral norms (88). \
\
>\'93Why are people so suspicious of morality, robust-realistically understood? Sometimes the worries are metaphysical \'96 moral properties, or truths, or facts, or values, or duties, or some such are said to be metaphysically queer, not to find a comfortable place in a naturalistic worldview, and so on. The merits of such worries are a matter for Chapter 6, but my point here is much more limited: if you think that things like the purported fact that we ought not to humiliate others is metaphysically queer, you should be equally metaphysically suspicious of things like the purported fact that two-boxing is the uniquely rational policy in Newcomb\'92s Problem. If you find it hard to metaphysically stomach things like the value of humanity (or the negative value of pain), you shouldn\'92t (prima facie, at least) find the value of excitement more appetizing. If the scientific worldview can\'92t find room for the wrongness of murder, it is hard to see how it can find room for the irrationality and (sometimes) irresponsibility involved in wishful thinking. The metaphysical worries about morality seem to just be instances of metaphysical worries about normativity more generally.\'94\
\
In short, if one finds false the notion that all reality is ultimately material, is there any *other* reason to doubt moral realism? Moral disagreement is the greatest one. Moral disagreement is an especially cutting objection against virtue ethics. \
\
Enoch\'92s discussion of the (supposedly) devastating objection that moral properties or moral entities, if they existed, would be queer. He clarifies and diffuses many iterations of this objection.  Section 4.3 suggests that moral realism is \'93especially suspicious\'94 among metanormative theories because moral reasons are categorical (93). There is a difference here between realism about (say) epistemic norms and realism about moral norms which are or are supposed to relate somehow with our motivations. \
\
Enoch\'92s fourth chapter ends with a kind of challenge.  In the absences of better objections to his view or arguments in favor of rival views, he conjectures \'93that no such further consideration can be found. But my argument here is open-ended in this way, and so my conclusion can perhaps better be thought of as a challenge: if you cannot find a flaw with the arguments of the two previous chapters, but want to resist the further conclusion of Robust Metaethical Realism, you had better be able to come up with a rationale for the surprising combination of views you find yourself with\'94 (99). \
\
David Enoch Chapter 5 Doing with Less - Against naturalism)\
\'93This chapter critically discusses three families of attempts to give the metaethical or meta-normative realist pretty much all that she wants, without resorting to the metaphysical extravagance of Robust Realism. The first is an attempt at a kind of naturalism that accommodates (by reduction, with this word sufficiently broadly understood) normativity. Naturalism is rejected mostly by emphasizing the thought that normative truths and facts are just too different from natural ones to be a subset thereof.\'94\
\
Most to my purposes, in its way, is Enoch\'92s fifth chapter. He characterizes the naturalistic viewpoint by first stating a few possible theses that would qualify as naturalistic: \
\
>\'93Now, as already hinted, it\'92s not clear what the precise naturalist claim would be.2 Suggestions in this area include things like the following: normative facts just are (identical with) natural facts; normative facts are reducible to natural ones; normative facts are metaphysically grounded in natural ones; normative facts are constituted by natural facts. And further distinctions may be relevant here. For instance, we may want to distinguish \'96 even if we\'92ve settled on an identity claim \'96 between type\'96type and token\'96token identity. Furthermore, it\'92s not as if the terms just used (in any of these suggestions) are philosophically transparent. It is, after all, not at all clear, and far less is it uncontroversial, how reduction is best understood, or how grounding is to be distinguished from constitution, or \'96 perhaps most clearly \'96 how the natural is to be understood and delineated. So there are many, many suggestions that a fuller philosophical treatment would have to distinguish and evaluate piecemeal. Without pretending to cover everything in the neighborhood that needs covering, then, let me make a fairly concrete suggestion about how to capture the naturalist thought, and then argue against it. I have to concede, though, that nothing here will qualify as a conclusive argument, much less will it qualify as a conclusive argument against all possible roughly-speaking-naturalist positions here\'94 (101). \
\
\
What Enoch settles on is what he calls the nothing-over-and-above relation. In the debate, robust moral realists affirm the resolution that there are moral facts (or properties or truths etc.) over and above the natural facts; naturalists deny the resolution. \
\
>\'93When I speak of irreducibly normative (and moral) facts, I use the term \'93reduction\'94 and its relatives somewhat loosely, to pick out the nothing-over-and-above relation. According to Robust Realism, then, there are moral and other normative facts that are not merely natural ones; according to Robust Realism it is just false to say of (all) the normative facts that they are nothing over and above natural ones. The relation between the normative facts and the natural ones is not like that between statues and \'93their\'94 lumps of clay, or between chair-facts and facts about their structure and function,7 or between mental facts and physical facts (according to the monist)\'94 (102). \
\
Stopped at % 103 Enoch\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ##David Enoch Chapter 6 Metaphysics (Against Frank Jackson)\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
How is Moral Disagreement a Problem?\
\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 349-51  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 11:24 AM\
\
It follows that it is not just that whether we should accept metaethical realism depends (among other things) on what the best explanation of moral disagreement is. What the best explanation of moral disagreement is also depends (among other things) on \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 429-33  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 11:34 AM\
\
Elsewhere (Enoch 2003, 2007a) I argue that our main reason to believe in metaethical or metanormative realism is not based on the role moral truths, facts and properties may have in explaining agreement (or, for that matter, any other phenomenon), but rather on the role they play in our deliberation about what to do. Even if such facts and properties are explanatorily dispensable, I argue, they are delibemtively indispensable - we cannot in good faith deliberate about what to do without believing in them - and there is no non-question-begging reason to take explanatory but not deliberative indispensability seriously. \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 474-77  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 11:51 AM\
\
59 For powerful presentations of this and related objections to naturalist realism, see Horgan and Timmons (1991), Loeb (1998). For an attempt at a reply, see Brink (2001). Tersman (2006, p. 85) claims that his related points apply to non-naturalist as well as naturalist realist views. But it seems to me that Tersman's characterization of realism - and in particular, his emphasis on the continuity of moral and natural facts (2006, e.g. 98) - in fact shows otherwise. \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 514-15  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 01:19 PM\
\
So if the argument is to be rejected without rejecting internalism, it must be argued that some motivations are necessarily found in all agents, that, in other words, some motivations are constitutive of agency. \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 504-7  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 01:31 PM\
\
Assume that someone morally ought to 0 only if they are, or under suitable conditions would be, motivated to O,64 and call this assumption "Internalism."65 Assume further that agents' motivations (or motivational sets)66 diverge fairly radically, so that there is no type of action that all are, or under suitable conditions would be, motivated to perform. It then follows that there is no moral ought-judgment that is true of everyone. \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 566-70  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 01:35 PM\
\
Premise 2 does not follow deductively from 1 . What would be needed for the argu-ment argu-ment to regain respectability is a further premise to the extent, roughly, that objective moral truth (or perhaps objective truth more generally) is necessarily decidable, that there can be no (moral) truth at which we have no method of arriving. But I see no reason why anyone should accept such a verificationist premise in general,71 and I see no reason why anyone should accept it about morality unless they are already prepared - for independent reasons, presumably - to reject metaethical realism.72 \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 576-82  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 01:36 PM\
\
What is meant, then, by the claim that there is no method to decide cases of moral disagreement? It seems to me four different thoughts may be - and often are - expressed by such claims. The point may be, first, that we just have no method of proceeding in cases of moral disagreement, that facing disagreement we are, as it were, at a loss for words, knowing not what we can possibly say or do next; or second, that though we do proceed in any number of ways, none of them is justified; or third, that there is no method that is guaranteed to lead to agreement, to make at least one party to the debate see her or his error; or fourth, that there is no method of settling the disagreement that is itself accepted as the proper method by all parties to the original disagreement. \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 621-28  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 01:39 PM\
\
Certainly, the absence of a method guaranteed to eliminate disagreement does not deductively entail the denial of realism. To do that we would need to add another premise, to the effect that though they may be morally mis-taken, mis-taken, people cannot be too mistaken, they cannot be such as to resist the moral truth when presented to them via a justified method. But I see no reason to accept this further premise, at least not unless one is already committed to the denial of realism. Neither is the absence of guaranteed dialectical success best explained by the denial of realism. The morally mistaken may be unconvinced by justified methods for any number of reasons - they may be too stupid, or may have epistemological beliefs (about which methods justify which beliefs) that are too crazy, or may not be willing to listen open-mindedly, or may again be subject to the distorting effects of interests - all of which perfectly compatible with realism. \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 635-36  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 01:39 PM\
\
Again, let me accept that there is no agreed method of settling moral disagreement,77 though I should say that I have doubts with regard to the availability of such a method in physics or anywhere else.78 \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 660-64  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 01:42 PM\
\
78 Some Creationists, for instance, do not accept the scientific method. Of course, they are not often thought of as physicists. But utilizing this fact to save the purported disanalogy between physics and morality here would be cheating. One can always guarantee agreement on method by restricting the group of those who count (physicists, say) to just those who already agree on the relevant method. For an attempt to defend the analogy between disagreement in ethics and in the natural sciences (partly) by noting this point, see Sturgeon (2006, p. 108). \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Note Loc. 664  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 01:42 PM\
\
consensus haunting our schools\
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 710-13  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 01:46 PM\
\
83 Many of the metaethical issues generalize straightforwardly to metanormative ones. If this is also true of the argument from rationally irresolvable disagreement (and it seems to me to be so), and seeing that the argument's premise is a normative claim (about what it is rationally permissible to believe), then this argument if sound entails also an antirealist view about its own premise. Depending on the details of the relevant antirealist view, this may cause a problem in the vicinity of self-defeat. But I cannot discuss this point further here. \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 828-37  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 01:55 PM\
\
96 Here is a closely related point: It is sometimes said in an attempt to capture the idea of a no-fault disagreement that moral disagreement survives the elimination of all mistakes of reasoning and all false non-moral non-moral beliefs. But this way of understanding what "no-fault" comes to begs the question against the realist. For what reason (that does not already presuppose the denial of realism) is there to distinguish between moral and non-moral false beliefs? If not being rationally at fault requires elimination of mistaken beliefs, it also requires - unless we already reject metaethical realism - the elimination of mistaken moral beliefs, and then it seems clear that there can be no no-fault moral disagreement. And if we decide not to take moral mistakes as establishing a rational fault, then perhaps no-fault moral disagreements are possible, but why believe that this shows anything about metaethical realism? Perhaps, for instance, scientific disagreement can survive the elimination of all non-scientific mistakes, but surely this does not support the rejection of scientific realism. Lillehammer (2004, p. 99), for instance, counts reliability on both sides among the necessary conditions for no-fault disagreement, but does not notice that this raises the problem discussed in this footnote in an especially troubling way. \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 850-53  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 01:56 PM\
\
The worry, which I address at length elsewhere,104 is that on realist - or at least robustly realist -assumptions there is no plausible way of explaining the supposed correlation between our moral beliefs and the moral truths (invoking an empirically dubious faculty of rational intuition amounts, the thought goes, to naming the mystery rather than demystifying \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 876-83  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 01:58 PM\
\
Think of self-evidence again: Self-evidence can be thought of as the beginning of a moral epistemology that (among other things) explains the correlation between our moral beliefs and the moral truths. But -as can be seen from Sect. 3 above - it is hard to reconcile a moral epistemology grounded in self-evidence with facts about moral disagreement. And this is an example of how moral disagreement can be relevant to the epistemological challenge: It counts rather heavily against one attempt at addressing it (in terms of self-evidence). Disagreement can thus make matters harder for the realist, not because disagreement itself grounds an argument against realism, but because disagreement sets adequacy constraints on ways of addressing the general epistemological challenge to realism. This, it seems to me, is the most interesting role moral disagreement may have as a part of an objection to realism.108 And seeing that I will not here suggest a realist response to the epistemological challenge, \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 896-98  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 01:59 PM\
\
dis-106 This way of understanding the epistemol\'f3gica! challenge to realism follows Field's (1989, pp. 25-30) understanding of the analogous problem for Platonism in the philosophy of mathematics, often referred to as the Benacerraf Problem (Benacerraf 1973). \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 909-25  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 02:00 PM\
\
I leave it to antirealists to present better versions of arguments from disagreement.109 Let me conclude by emphasizing a fact that will make this an exceedingly hard task. Disagreement is widespread not just in morality, but also about morality, in metaethics, and indeed in philosophy in general.110 Here too, one comes across widespread dis-agreement among those who do not appear to be guilty of anything worth calling a cognitive shortcoming, here too this disagreement seems to call for explanation, here too it is not clear that there is some underlying agreement, say about the method to settle superficial disagreements. But this means that it is not going to be easy to present an argument from moral disagreement that does not defeat itself.111 If, for instance, the argument takes actual disagreement as a reason to be suspicious of realism, then given actual disagreement about metaethical realism and indeed about arguments from dis-agreement (this one included), the proponent of the argument seems to be committing 109 Notice that the discussion above - if successful - also casts doubt on the availability of antirealist arguments that are based on combining the effect of more than one of the arguments from disagreement. 110 Dworkin (1996, p. 1 14) argues that there is more disagreement in philosophy than in morality. 111 For a somewhat similar point see Swinburne (1976). Shafer-Landau (2003, p. 220; 2006, pp. 218-221) notices that arguments from disagreement can be applied in philosophy in general, and in metaethics in particular, so that there is something self-defeating about the antirealist' s employment of this argument from disagreement. But Shafer-Landau does not notice that this may render the arguments from disagreement themselves self-defeating in the way described in the text. Tersman (2006, p. 112) notices that a key premise in his favorite argument from disagreement - the one he calls "the latitude idea" - applies to much in philosophy as well as to ethics. But he does not proceed to discuss the self-defeat worry this fact may give rise to. \'a3\} Springer himself also to a denial of realism about the realism debate in metaethics and so about his very argument. \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 934-62  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 02:02 PM\
\
Attfield, Robin. 1979. How not to be a moral relativist The Monist 62: 510-523. Ayer, Alfred Jules. 1936. Language, truth and logic. London: Victor Gollancz. (2nd ed. 1946). Benacerraf, Paul. 1973. Mathematical truth. The Journal of Philosophy 70: 661-680. Bennigson, Thomas. 1996. Irresolvable disagreement and the case against moral realism. The Southern Journal of Philosophy 34: 41 1^37. Blackburn, Simon. 1981. Reply: Rule-following and moral realism. In Wittgenstein: To follow a rule, ed. S. H. Holtzman and C. M. Leich, 163-187. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. Boghossian, Paul. 2000. Knowledge of logic. In New Essays on the A Priori, ed. Paul Boghossian and Christopher Peacocke, 229-254. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Bond, E. J. 1983. Reason and value. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Bonjour, Laurence. 1998. In defense of pure reason. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Boyd, Richard. 1988. How to be a moral realist. In Essays on moral realism, ed. G. Sayre-McCord, 181-228. Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press. Brandt, Richard. 1944. The significance of differences of ethical opinion for ethical rationalism. Philosophy and Phenomenolocical Research 4: 469-495. Brink, David. 1989. Moral realism and the foundations of ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Brink, David. 2001. Realism, naturalism, and moral semantics. Social Philosophy and Policy 18: 154-176. Carson, Thomas, and Paul Moser. 2001. Introduction. In Moral relativism - a reader, ed. Thomas Carson and Paul Moser, 1-21. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. Chang, Ruth. 1997. Introduction. In Incommensurability, ine ompar ability, and practical reason, ed. Ruth Chang, 1-34. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Copp, David, and David Zimmerman, ed. 1984. Morality, reason and truth -new essays on the foundations of ethics. Totowa N.J.: Rowman & Allanheld. Dancy, Jonathan. 2000. Practical reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Darwall, Stephen. 1983. Impartial reason. Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press. Darwall, Stephen, Allan Gibbard, and Peter Railton. 1992. Toward Fin de Siede ethics: Some trends. The Philosophical Review 101: 115-189; reprinted in 1997, ed. S. Darwall, A. Gibbard, and P. Railton. Moral discourse and practice: Some philosophical approaches, 3-47. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. Dworkin, Ronald. 1996. Objectivity and truth: You'd better believe it. Philosophy and Public Affairs 25:87-139. 25:87-139. Enoch, David. 2003. An argument for robust metanormative realism (Ph.D. Thesis, NYU, 2003), available at: http://law.huji .ac.il/eng/segel.asp?cat=44 1 &in=44 1 &staff_id=63&staff_page=208 Enoch, David. 2005. Why idealize? Ethics 1 15(4): 759-787. Enoch, David. 2006. Agency, shmagency: Why normativity won't come from what is constitutive of agency. Philosophical Review 115: 169-198. Enoch, David. 2007a. An outline of an argument for robust metanormative realism. Oxford Studies in Metaethics 2: 21-50. Enoch, David. 2007b. Rationality, coherence, convergence: A critical comment of Michael Smith s Ethics and the A Priori. Philosophical Books 48: 99-108. Enoch, David, and Joshua Schechter. 2008. How are basic belief-forming methods justified? Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 76: 547-579. Field, Hartry. 1989. Realism, mathematics, and modality. New York: Basil Black well. Gert, Joshua. 2002. Expressi vism and language learning. Ethics 1 12: 292-314. Gibbard, Allan. 2003. Thinking how to live. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Goldman, Alan. 1990. Skepticism about goodness and lightness. The Southern Journal of Philosophy 29(Supplement): 167-183. Gowans, Christopher. 2000a. Introduction. In Gowans (2000b), 1-43. Gowans, Christopher, ed. 2000b. Moral disagreements: Classic and contemporary readings. London and New York: Routledge. Gowans, Christopher. 2004. A priori refutations of disagreement arguments against moral objectivity: Why \
==========\
David Enoch, How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism, Journal of Ethics 2009 (keithedbuhler@gmail.com)\
- Highlight Loc. 968-1013  | Added on Thursday, March 27, 2014, 02:03 PM\
\
Press. Harman, Gilbert. 1977. The nature of morality. Oxford: Oxford University \
Harman, Gilbert. 1984. Is there a single true morality? In Copp and Zimmerman, 27-48. \
Harman, Gilbert, and Judith Jarvis Thomson. 1996. Moral relativism and moral objectivity. Oxford: Black well. Horgan, Terry, and Mark Timmons. 1991. New wave moral realism meets moral twin Earth. Journal of Philosophical Research 16: 447-465. \
Hume, David. 1751/1957. An enquiry concerning the principles of morals. Liberal Arts Press. \
Hurley, Susan. 1989. Natural reasons. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. \
Kim, Jaegwon. 1998. Reasons and the first person. In Human action, deliberation and causation, ed. J. A. M. Bransen and S. E. Cuypers, 67-87. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. \
Korsgaard, Christine. 2002. Self-constitution: Agency, identity, and integrity. The 2002 Locke Lectures, available at http://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/~korsgaar/ \
Lewis, David. 1982. Logic for equivocators. Nous 16: 431-441; reprinted in his Papers in philosophical logic, 97-1 10. Cambrdige: Cambridge University Press. \
Lillehammer, Hallvard. 2004. Moral error theory. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 104: 95-1 11. Loeb, David. 1998. Moral realism and the argument from disagreement. Philosophical Studies 90: 281-303. Mackie, John. 1977. Ethics: Inventing right and wrong. Harmonds worth: Penguin Books. Marmor, Andrei. 2001. Positive law and objective values. Oxford: Oxford University Press. \
Smith, Michael. 2007. In defense of Ethics and the A priori: A reply to Enoch, Hieronymi, and Tannen-baum. Philosophical Books 48: 136-149. culture and philosophy. Cambridge: Moody- A\
dams, Michele. 1997. Fieldwork in familiar places: Morality, Harvard University Press. \
Moore, Michael. 1992. Moral reality revisited. Michigan Law Review 90: 2425-2533. \
Nagel, Thomas. 1986. The view from nowhere. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. \
Oddie, Graham. 2005. Value, reality and desire. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. \
Rachels, James. 1999. The elements of moral philosophy (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.\
Railton, Peter. 1993. What the non-cognitivist helps us to see the naturalist must help us to explain. In Reality, representation and projection, ed. J. Haldane and C. Wright, 279-300. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. \
Rawls, John. 1980. Kantian construcitvism in moral theory. The Journal of Philosophy 11: 515-572. & Springer \
Raz, Joseph. 2001. Notes on value and objectivity. In Objectivity in law and morals, ed. B. Leiter, 194-233. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; reprinted in \
Raz, J. 1999. Engaging reason, 118-160. Oxford: Oxford University Press. \
Rosati, Connie. 2003. Agency and the open question argument. Ethics 1 13: 490-527. \
Rosen, Gideon. 2001. Nominalism, naturalism, epistemic relativism. Philosophical Perspectives 15: 69-91. \
Scanlon, Thomas. 1995. Moral theory: Understanding and disagreement. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 55: 343-356. \
Schiffer, Stephen. 2003. The things we mean. Oxford: Oxford University Press. \
Schneewind, Jerome. 1998. The invention of autonomy- a history of modern moral philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. \
Seabright, Paul. 1988. Objectivity, disagreement, and projectibility. Inquiry 31: 25-51. \
Shafer-Landau, Russ. 1994. Ethical disagreement, ethical objectivism and moral indeterminacy. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 54: 331-344. \
Shafer-Landau, Russ. 2003. Moral realism- a defence. Oxford: Oxford University Press. \
Shafer-Landau, Russ. 2006. Ethics as philosophy: A defense of ethical nonnaturalism. In Metaethics after moore, ed. T. Horgan and M. Timmons, 209-232. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. \
Singer, Peter. 1972. Famine, affluence and morality. Philosophy and Public Affairs 1: 229-243. Press. \
Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter. 2006. Moral skepticisms. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Stratton-Lake, Philip. 2002. Introduction. In Ethical intuitionism: Re-evaluations, ed. Philip Stratton-Lake, 1-28. Oxford: Oxford University Press. \
Street, Sharon. 2003. Evolution and the nature of reasons. Ph.D. Thesis, Harvard University. \
Sturgeon, Nicholas. 1984. Moral explanations. In Copp and Zimmerman, 49-78. \
Sturgeon, Nicholas. 1992. Nonmoral explanations. Philosophical Perspectives 6: 97-117.\
 Sturgeon, Nicholas. 1994. Moral disagreement and moral relativism. Social Philosophy and Policy 11: 80-115. \
Sturgeon , Nicholas. 2006. Ethical naturalism. In The oxford handbook of ethical theory, ed. David Copp, 91-121. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. \
Swinburne, Richard. 1976. The objectivity of morality. Philosophy 51: 5-20. Press. \
Tersman, Folke. 2006. Moral disagreement. Cambridge: Cambridge University \
Thagard, Paul. 1978. The best explanation: Criteria for theory choice. The Journal of Philosophy 75: 76-92. \
Tolhurst, William. 1987. The argument from moral disagreement. Ethics 97: 610-621. \
Unger, Peter. 1996. Living high and letting die. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. \
Van Fraassen, Bastiaan. 1980. The scientific image. Oxford: Clarendon Press. \
Van Fraassen, Bastiaan. 1989. Laws and symmetry. Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press. \
Velleman, J. David. 1996. The possibility of practical reason. Ethics 106: 694-726; reprinted in his The possibility of practical reason. 170-199. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. \
Waldron, Jeremy. \'cd992. The irrelevance of moral objectivity. In Natural law theory: Contemporary essays, ed. Robert George, 158-187. Oxford: Clarendon Press. \
Wedgwood, Ralph. 2001. Conceptual role semantics for moral terms. The Philosophical Review 1 10: 1-30. \
Wedgwood, Ralph. 2007. The nature of normativity. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. \
Wiggins, David. 1990. Moral cognitivism, moral relativism and motivating moral beliefs. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 91: 61-86. \
Williams, Bernard. 1980. Internal and external reasons. In his Moral luck, 101-1 13. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. \
Williams, Bernard. 1985. Ethics and the limits of philosophy. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. \
Wong, David. 1984. Moral relativity. Berkeley: University of California Press. \
Wong, David. 1986. On moral realism without foundation. The Southern Journal of Philosophy 24(Supp): 95-113. \
Wright, Crispin. 1992. Truth and objectivity. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. \
==========}