{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ###Stubborn Rationalism in Thomas Nagel\
\
Thomas Nagel is one of those frustrating thinkers who allude to and interact with many but cite or name only a few.  \
\
One of our governing questions in this dialectic has been: how do we know good from bad, right from wrong, desirable from undesirable when we in fact know it? This question assumes quite plausibly that we know the good at least some times and in some ways.  What does it mean to be good or right or desirable and how did we come to knowledge that X was such?\
Thomas Nagel\'92s view is that morality is objective, that moral values are really real, that moral knowledge is possible, that there are moral truths, etc. and etc. For Nagel, \'93objective\'94 means that reducing all values to merely subjective (in various senses of the term) is impossible, both theoretically and practically. The alternative then, is some kind of objectivity. He says, \'93The problem of the place of value in the natural world... has to do specifically with the practical domain \'97 the control and assessment of conduct.\'94 When the dust settles on long and complicated abstract discussions of the foundations of value, we still have to do something with our lives. And we cannot psychologically nor logically assert consistently that our choices of what to do are based on no reason. \
\
\
There are two senses of \'93objective\'94 that can be opposed to Nagel\'92s sense of \'93subjective.\'94 The thinner sense is that we can\'92t help but treat it as objective, whether it is or not \'97 this sense remains agnostic. The thicker sense is that we can\'92t help but treat some value as objective and the reason we psychologically or logically cannot do so is because it is really objective. This sense of objective is, by Nagel\'92s own argument, a hypothesis to explain a psychological or logical  impossibility, but it is a very good hypothesis. \
\
\
Nagel\'92s position here is that normative judgments are truth apt. He says, \'93Normative realism is the view that propositions about what gives us reasons for action can be true or false independently of how things appear to us, and that we can hope to discover the truth by transcending the appearances and subjecting them to critical assessment\'94 (View from Nowhere 139). However, he is quick to distinguish this answer from various answers to Question 3 \'97 what makes evaluative propositions true. He assures us, \'93it is not a form of Platonism. The claim is that there are reasons for action, that we have to discover them instead of deriving them from our pre-existing motives\'97 and that in this way we can acquire new motives superior to the old\'94 (139). So his answer to Question to is a staunch yes, but he wants to distinguish that affirmative from various ways of spelling out exactly how to explain truth aptitude. He says, \'93perhaps a richer metaphysic of morals could be devised, but I don\'92t know what it would be\'94 (139). \
\
\
His stance here may seem simply stubborn. But it is not. He treats objective values \'97 like the freedom of the sort relevant for moral accountability and self-responsibility \'97 as a \'93defeasible presumption\'94 (VFN 143). The burden of proof is on those who wish to argue that there are no objective values and no objectively true value judgments, or that putatively true value judgments like \'93we ought to treat others as equal to ourselves\'94 are not even truth apt. Like the reality of some item of the external world, the reality of an objective value can be defeated in individual cases, as when a long-cherished value judgment is exposed as a mere prejudice or instance of groupthink. But when I learn that a mirage is not real or a prejudice is false, I rightly conclude that some appearances are deceiving and that some products of groupthink are false. I do not \'97 and should not \'97 jump to the conclusion that all is appearance or all is prejudice. Just because some X are Y does not entail that all X are Y. We can only totalize a local exposoure of non-objectivity into global subjectivism if we make that invalid inference or hasten to hypothesis that unlikely explanation. \
\
Now, the explanation is more likely on the assumption that \'93if values are real, they must be real objects of some other kind\'94 (VFN 144). As the external world realist, so long as the moral realist can defend the mere possibility of objective value, the presumption of objective value remains the default position (VFN 143-144). He says, \'93If I have a severe headache, the headache seems to me to be not merely unpleasant, but a bad thing. Not only do I dislike it, but I think I have a reason to try to get rid of it. It is barely conceivable that this might be an illusion\'94 (VFN 145). Such glaring truths of daily experience may be puzzling against a background of physicalism, but it is not thereby to be abandoned. \
\
\
Thomas Nagel may be considered radically uncurious about the metaphysical question. He is right, I think, to say that metaethical questions often confuse the normative questions \'97 or rather that only by retaining focus on the primary normative questions can we keep perspective on metaethics. \
\
}