{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green23\blue24;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Brown\'92s \'93Really Naturalizing Virtue\'94 not only aims to satisfy the demanding criteria of naturalism with a robust account of virtues that satisfies the criterion of being a virtue theory.  As he says, 
\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93However, in examining the theory we are led to a more modest understanding of what the ambitions of this kind of ethical naturalism ought to be\'94 (1).
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 The success is not monolithic \'97 he concedes that our account of virtue is not able to satisfy all the demands of naturalism without giving up on (a) virtue theory\'92s most common \'93decision theory\'94, its most common way of offering action guidance, and (b) the substantive view of rationality in which practical reason by definition aims at 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
a good 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
or 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
the good 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
(rather than, a la Hume, aiming at anything). \
\
Some key quotes:\
\'93One argument in favor of naturalized virtue ethics, from a naturalistic perspective, is that the theory is consistent with neo-Darwinism. Our naturalistic ethical theory\'97whatever form it might eventually take\'97must be consistent with neo-Darwinism, the best explanation we have of genetic diversity and functional complexity in the organic world. Furthermore, although I will only outline such a case here, a case could be made that, if neo-Darwinism is true, a prediction of that theory is that something like naturalized virtue ethics ought to be our logic of evaluation, using \'91ought\'92 in its purely predictive sense. That is, if our natural, ultimate end is reproductive success (or, alternatively put, genetic proliferation), then we would expect that we would have a psychological tendency to valorize those traits that reliably enable realization of that end. Such a logic of evaluation would, as it were, sew the seeds of its own success, as long as it had a genetic base. Also, we might predict that this logic of evaluation would tend to praise itself, that is, would tend to valorize its own existence. From a purely neo-Darwinian perspective, the ultimate function of any gene is to secure its own continued existence. That it could do so, ceteris paribus, explains why it is here.\
\'93All this is, of course, speculative. Determining that something like naturalized virtue ethics represents our evolved logic of evaluation is a complicated empirical issue. Nevertheless, these considerations explain, if naturalized virtue ethics is our evaluative logic, why it is our logic. Even if it is our logic, however, that fact would not entail that the logic is correct. Just because it is our logic does not mean that it ought to be. Of course, if it is the only logic that can be ours, due to our evolved psychology, it follows that\'97given that \'91ought implies \'91can\'92\'97no other logic of evaluation is a plausible candidate. 
\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93One advantage this theory has over related theories is that its explicit acceptance of evolutionary theory allows its proponents to provide a principled, naturalistic explanation for why certain ends are our natural ends. Quite simply, they evolved to be so. On Hursthouse\'92s account, it looks like an open question whether a unifying theoretical account can be provided to explain why those things get onto the list of ends and thus are called \'91good\'92, except to say that they are our ends. The same goes for a theory like Foot\'92s, where eudaimonia or flourishing is taken to be our natural end. In Aristotle\'92s terms, we call the ends \'91good\'92 just because they are our ends, that for which we aim and strive, and it seems thatnofurtherexplanationofthegoodnessoftheseendscanbegiven.
\fs18 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up10 25 
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 Itisnotthattheendsareself- justifying but rather that they are not the kind of thing in need of justification. This, of course, leaves the ends themselves\'97if they truly are our ends\'97immune to rational criticism. 
\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Some naturalized virtue ethicists, including Foot, Hursthouse, and perhaps Aristotle, think that we can arrive at an account of the ends through observation or human ethology. There is, of course, some room to argue about whether these are our natural ends. For the neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalist, that argument forms part of the ethical discourse. However, for the naturalist the argument takes place in a court into which has been introduced a cold, hard theoretical fact. The ultimate end of all complex biological traits is individual survival and continuance of the species or genotype, because those traits having served those ends in the past explains why those traits currently exist.
\fs18 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up10 26  
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 The theory I am presenting here, as opposed to Hursthouse\'92s or Foot\'92s variants, can explain why what we take to be natural ends are our natural ends: our dispositional evaluative tendencies evolved that way, in fact, were selected by nature to be that way. We have a well-established theory\'97neo-Darwinism\'97that makes certain predictions about what human beings will take to be important, that is, will take as ends to be pursued. We observe whether those predictions come true. None of this means, of course, that reproductive success is good. Thus, my version of naturalized virtue ethics is in more or less the same boat as any other such teleological theory. But such is the ethical limit of this kind of theory. Even if it is \'93our\'94 logic, it does not follow that it is the right one to have. 
\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Naturalized virtue ethics, then, is not a \'93decision theory,\'94 nor is it intended as a prescriptive ethical theory. It does not tell you what you ought to do. It is a theory about an important mode of ethical evaluation. We could look at an oak tree, for example, and see that, given what we know about oak trees, it would be a better oak tree if it had more water. But it does not follow that we ought to water it. The same thing goes for our evaluations of human beings. Even if we can look at someone and judge that he would be better off\'97in the sense of being a better human being\'97if he had courage, nothing follows directly about what I or anyone else ought to do in regards to him, nor what the state should do. There is an \'91is\'92-\'91ought\'92 gap, as it were, forevermore. However, I or anyone else can judge the coward as, say, a middling human being. Moreover, we evaluate someone\'92s actions insofar as they are evidence of someone\'92s character. We do not directly, in naturalized virtue ethics, evaluate actions. Even a good human being can do things that are bad or wrong. The question is whether he or she does such things consistently and from a settled disposition.\'94\
(Brown, \'93Really Naturalizing Virtue\'94, 11-12) 
\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\fs30 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93\'85we can see that Foot\'92s naturalism offers a fresh approach to objectivism in ethics. Yet, in spite of such attractions, 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Natural Goodness 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
is in the midst of a cool reception. Here, I will argue that this reception is due to the fact that Foot\'92s naturalism draws on a picture of the biological world that is at odds with the view embraced by most contemporary scientists and philosophers. Foot\'92s readers commonly assume that the account of the biological world that she must want to adhere to, and that she nevertheless mistakenly departs from, is the account offered by contemporary neo-Darwinian biological sciences.\'94 (Wright, \'93What is Natural about Foot\'92s Naturalism?\'94 309).  @Hacker2009natural %}