{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red20\green20\blue20;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 One of the key sub-conversations within metaethics is the naturalism/non-naturalism debate. Ethical naturalists, at least in this context, are moral realists of a certain sort. Namely, they think moral facts exist in the world but not in a supernatural or nonnatural realm of value, Sellars\'92 \'93space of reasons\'94, Popper\'92s \'93third world\'94, Plato\'92s heaven, or some such. Moral facts exist right here 
\i in this world 
\i0 of people, stars, gold, mountains, algae, deer, and human civilizations. 
\i  
\i0 Whatever this world turns out ultimately to be like (atoms? superstrings?) we will be able to give an account of moral facts in the same privileged terms that feature in our accounts of physics, chemistry, biology, psychology, sociology \'97 or perhaps even just physics. Eventually science will out. Such is the faith in the scientific enterprise(s) and in the ultimacy of nature. \
Now, naturalism as a philosophical program or school of thought \'97 metaphysical naturalism or \'93naturalism per se\'94 \'97 has its critics. 
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\i\fs28  Successful is Naturalism?; Naturalism in Question; Naturalism 
\i0 Goetz and Taliaferro, 
\i Against Scientism.
\f1\i0\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\i\fs28  \

\i0 And its proponents are cool, confident, and collected. \'93\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The great majority of contemporary philosophers would happily accept naturalism as just characterized.\'94 (Papineau 2007)\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
But an embarrassing number of philosophers admit that \'91naturalism\'92 means almost nothing. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}\'93\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The term \'91naturalism\'92 has no very precise meaning in contemporary philosophy.\'94 (Papineau) Papineau avoid the definitional issue with this apologia: \'93Rather than getting bogged down in an essentially definitional issue, this entry will adopt a different strategy. It will outline a range of philosophical commitments of a generally naturalist stamp, and comment on their philosophical cogency.\'94 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\'95	}\'93The term \'91naturalism\'92 remains contentious and subject to equivocation, misunderstanding, and abuse.\'94 (Brown 2008, 2)\
{\listtext	\'95	}\'93Naturalism has been held by many to be synonymous with \'91atheism.\'92 It need not be, of course, though what it actually means to reject supernaturalism is not so clear. If by \'91nature\'92 we mean \'91everything that is\'92, then of course there is nothing outside nature, so supernaturalism is rejected almost as an afterthought\'85 nature is, more or less, what our latest and best science tells us it is\'85 those entities countenanced by our latest and best science. What comprises those entities would require a treatise on naturalistic ontology\'94 (Brown 2008, 2-3). \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 In this essay, I survey the rich diversity of uses of the term \'91naturalism,\'92 and probe for some common significance (or a few significances) that unite them. \
Some of the possibilities are tautologous. (\'93Naturalists believe only in what is real and have knowledge of only what is true.\'94) \
I propose a novel definition of naturalism that captures the \'93spirit\'94 of naturalisms. That spirit is a belief in the continuity of existence and the continuity of knowledge, their unity and harmony within themselves and with each other. \
I then revisit, in light of this probing discussion, naturalism\'92s two most commonly admitted substantive commitments: atheism and scientism. \
As for atheism, naturalism is either 
\i just atheism 
\i0 (in which case why call it by any other name?) or it is a belief in continuity of nature, which limits the kinds of gods that count as naturalistic but does not exclude gods per se. And it is not just atheism. So it is, I conclude, the belief in the continuity of nature and science. But nature is defined by everyone (above) in terms of science. So naturalism is, we might say, just a belief in (modern, empirical) scientific methods. \
As for science, our investigation into naturalism shows that our definition of science needs renovating \'97 or rather, that some of the horrifying confusion that has gripped our discipline for the last hundred years needs dispelling, and some of the damage needs undoing. \
The demarcation problem within the philosophy of science impinges on our definition of nature, creating an iteration of the demarcation problem I\'92ll call the \'93demarcation of nature problem.\'94 Science is either just knowledge or it is only part of knowledge (the empirical part). But science is not just the empirical part of knowledge, because math, logic, physics, computational science, and so on are not empirical. So science is just knowledge. In which case, nature is either everything that is knowable by any legitimate (empirical or non-empirical) methods of knowing. Since we can know about numbers, souls, and God by legitimate methods of knowing, mathematics, psychology, and theology are sciences. \
So the constraint \'93nature is only what is countenanced by the sciences\'94 includes theology. \
The inevitable conclusion of this inquiry is that the naturalism/non-naturalism debate is bankrupt. It is not clear enough about its terms to sustain serious critical reflection. Ethical \'93naturalists\'94 are either just materialists (moral facts are material facts) or they are no different from ethical \'93nonnaturalists\'94 (moral facts are 
\i something real
\i0 ). \
This kind of merely terminology dispute, and the fact that it has continued for so many decades, is an embarrassment to our discipline. \
Instead of arguing about nature, we need to straightforwardly say what we mean: either moral facts have nothing to do with God or gods, or they do. \
\
\'97\'97\
The naturalist, as he hopes to define himself, is either a reductive physicalist or else his views are any and every possible philosophical view sans theism. Naturalism is either physicalism or atheism.\
\
The problem is that the self-definitions offered are either fatally vague (even if coherent) or else clear and incoherent. We ought to eschew vague self-definitions just as willingly as incoherent ones. \
\
Naturalism\'92s demarcation problem is that \'93nature is what science studies\'94 either includes formal sciences like mathematics, logic, and theology or excludes them. If it excludes them, then \'93nature\'94 can not include metaphysically real abstract objects. If it includes them, then \'93nature\'94 can include the Judeo-Christian God. The number of self-defined \'93naturalists\'94 who want to include abstract objects but exclude such a God are many. But their problem is, how to do it? Can it be done? }