{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 Verdana;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red34\green33\blue33;\red102\green102\blue102;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid2\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\slminimum371\sa200

\f0\fs28 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
M
\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 acIntyre, 
\i After Virtue
\i0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\qj
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
MacIntyre, Alasdair. 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
After Virtue
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Second Edition. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1984 (1981).\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\qj
\ls1\ilvl1
\f2\fs22 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\'95	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The foundation of his later work and the most important of his books to read. Includes his arguments about the failures of modern philosophy and politics and how those failures might be overcome, or at least diminished, with the help of the philosophy of Aristotle and the political way of life of the Greek city-state.
\f0\b\fs28 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 Preamble: \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\i\b0 \cf0 After Virtue 
\i0 tells a story. The problem is not just that we moderns lack virtue; we lack an understanding of virtue combined with a partial understanding of several incomplete fragments of virtue. The solution is, first, to get perspective on the problem behind the problem.  The \'93problem behind the problem\'94 is the Enlightenment abandonment of 
\i telos 
\i0 for individual human persons and whole human communities or political units all directed towards one shared human 
\i good, 
\i0 the personal and political virtues being in this frame the means to that 
\i telos.
\i0  The solution to that is the personal and political restoration of a shared conception of a good \'97 better yet, a shared recognition of the real good \'97 and a realignment with the broadly Aristotelian tradition in cultivating the virtues that are by definition means to that 
\i telos
\i0 . 
\i \
\ls2\ilvl0
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf0 One sentence: \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Modern moralities are a mere simulacrum of morality, fragments of an older (largely Aristotelian/Christian) tradition of virtue. That tradition most broadly understood, with its practices and its awareness of the narrative unity of human life, is the only alternative that does not fold under the Nietzschean critique of emotivism, rational morality. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Precis by Chapter: \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0\cf3 1.	A Disquieting Suggestion\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Morality today is characterized by a complete lack of understanding of what morality is, what its guts are. The torn pieces of the one-whole garment are, each in isolation, unintelligible to each other and to themselves. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 2.	The Nature of Moral Disagreement Today\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 It is shrill as if no agreement or authority exists, yet loud as if agreement could be reached.\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 3.	Emotivism: Social Content and Social Context\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Moore is just as much an emotivist or proto-emotivist as Mackie, just in a different way. He masks the inability to ground morality in intuitionism. Nietzsche will tear off that mask just as much as he will tear off the mask of Kant and the rationalists. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 4.	The Predecessor Culture and the Enlightenment Project of Justifying Morality\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 5.	Why the Enlightenment Project of Justifying Morality Had to Fail\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 It had to fail because it rejected telos, which of the three parts of morality (man as he is, man as he should be, and the practices man needs in order to become what we should) is the part that makes virtue intelligible. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 6.	Some Consequences of the Failure of the Project\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 7.	\'91Fact\'92, Explanation and Expertise\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 8.	The Character of Generalizations in Social Science and their Lack of Predictive Power\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 9.	Nietzsche or Aristotle? \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Nietzsche exposes the Kantian and Utilitarian and contractarian attempts to ground goodness in rationality as false. So what\'92s left is emotivism (the will to persuade) or else Aristotelian virtue. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 10.	The Virtues of Heroic Societies
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 Homeric virtue was (a) social (indexed to roles) and also (b) nonmoral at least in our modern dilapidated sense of \'91moral,\'92 referring more to qualities of strength, cunning, prowess, etc. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 11.	The Virtues of Athens\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Plato\'92s virtues, Sophoclese virtues. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 12.	Aristotle\'92s Account of the Virtues\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Aristotle is missing an awareness of tragedy, of fundamentally insuperable forces acting on and against the good man despite his lack of flaws. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 13.	Medieval Aspects and Occasions\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 The medieval period deployed virtue (conceived as those qualities conducive to the common life of a community heading for the same 
\i telos
\i0 ) in the context of divine law. \
\
175 - Aristotle was improved on by the medievals in that the 
\i end 
\i0 of the narrative was of special importance. For Aristotle, virtue just 
\i is a certain kind of life
\i0 . \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 14.	The Nature of the Virtues\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Is there any one conception of \'93virtue\'94? Is there anything that unites Jane Austin, St. Paul, Aristotle, and Benjamin Franklin? What about \'91acquisitiveness\'92? Humility? While the virtues are indexed to a society and a practice, there are common elements. A virtue exists in the \'93acceptance of some prior account of... social and moral life...\'94 (186). The first stage invokes \'93practices\'94; the second \'93narrative order of human life\'94 and the third \'93a moral tradition.\'94A practice is a complex social activity with internal goods, like farming, to which standards of excellence (defined by the practice) apply. The virtues are acquired qualities that enable the achievement of the goods of practices. (190). Practices require relationship between those who practice (191). Practices are not 
\i technical skills 
\i0 nor 
\i institutions. 
\i0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 15.	The Virtues, the Unity of a Human Life and the Concept of a Tradition\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 16.	From the Virtues to Virtue and after Virtue\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Jane Austen is the last bearer of the older tradition. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 17.	Justice as a Virtue: Changing Conceptions\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Nozick\'92s and Rawls\'92 notions of justice are opposed, but share presuppositions, and are both opposed to the Arisotetelian tradition. Both do not consider 
\i desert 
\i0 (what is due) and reject reference to the past (249-51). \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf3 18.	After Virtue: Nietzsche 
\i or 
\i0 Aristotle\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Responses and Reflections\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 The book is divided into two movements. The first, from chps 1-8 tells the story of the problem, the \'93fall.\'94 The second, chps 9-17 tells the story of the solution, \'93redemption,\'94 looking back to go forward. Chp 9 is the cardinal chapter, in my view, the hinge on which the book turns. \
\
Chapter 9 is \'93Nietzsche or Aristotle?\'94 and poses two rivals, the Aristotelian tradition (of virtue) as against the Enlightenment tradition (of morality justified by rationality rather than virtue), where Nietzsche is a sort of Tazmanian devil storming into the rivalry to destroy the Enlightenment tradition \'97 or rather, to unmask is as emotivism: the habit of imposing one\'92s personal feelings on others by force, of manipulation and compulsion. Kant (et. al.,) provide the antecedent, but Nietzsche shoves our noses in a consequent that provides a 
\i reductio ad absurdum 
\i0 for Kant (et. al.). The only remaining option, then, is Aristotle, and virtue. \
\
I find MacIntyre\'92s mythologizing fascinating. He is telling stories. The key to this book is the narrative unity of the human life chapter, where he says human beings are story-tellers. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf0 \
}