{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Robert Adams I: Being For the Infinite Good\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Before summarizing the debate between Boyd and Adams, we should say a few words about Robert Adams\'92 project. At an opposite metaethical extreme from Boyd, Adams represents supernaturalism. Adams\'92 fascinating 
\i Finite and Infinite Goods: A Framework for Ethics
\i0  is a comprehensive case for, and explanation of, an ethical framework organized around an infinite good (God) who grounds a great variety of finite goods. \
\
Importantly, as we shall see below, Adams places a high premium on what he calls 
\i being for the Good
\i0 . \'93Being for\'94 something is a general orientation towards it, love for it, allegiance to it, and so on. Being for the good with love and allegiance is critical for Adams and for my comments about Boyd\'92s critiques. Why is it so critical for Adams? One reason is that one cannot love 
\i all
\i0  finite goods, yet he sees (and I think rightly) that this inability is not a fault. But one can love the infinite good \'97 be devoted to it. One can be for the Good without loving an unlimited set of finite goods. In fact, one can express ones orientation 
\i toward 
\i0 the infinite good 
\i by way of
\i0  loving limited sets of finite goods.\
\
A second reason
\i  being for
\i0  is so important for Adams\'92 account is that we can and ought to love many different kinds of goods: people of various kinds, beauties of art and nature, abstract truths of mathematics and philosophy, and so on. Being for the good (in general) makes sense of our generic aspirations for excellence of many kinds,  and our admiration for those who are able to successful love and exemplify such a variety of excellences, both personal and impersonal. Even when our aspirations are unsuccessful, even in the case of ill consequences of our pursuit of excellence, there is something praiseworthy about the fundamental orientation toward the good.}