{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid5}
{\list\listtemplateid6\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid501\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid6}
{\list\listtemplateid7\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid601\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid7}
{\list\listtemplateid8\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid701\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid8}
{\list\listtemplateid9\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid801\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid9}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}{\listoverride\listid6\listoverridecount0\ls6}{\listoverride\listid7\listoverridecount0\ls7}{\listoverride\listid8\listoverridecount0\ls8}{\listoverride\listid9\listoverridecount0\ls9}}
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Why by virtuous? \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\parhyphenfactor20

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
For MacIntyre, the moral skeptic is estranged from the community. \
	When philosophers pose the skeptical challenge \'93why be moral?\'94 they are most often speaking in quotes. They are letting the debonair amoralist or the brick-headed moral dunce speak. They are forcing themselves to meet a challenge, even if it is mostly or entirely a hypothetical one.\
	Many of us have actually confronted moral skeptics. Those of us who not only \'93do philosophy\'94 professionally but also teach non-philosopher undergraduates or high school age, and engage in intellectual dialogue with friends for fun, have confronted moral skepticism in the hearts and minds of human beings. But this skepticism in the wild is rarely idenitcal to the petri-dish variety of our thought-experiments. Actual moral skeptics, in my experience, are 
\i only 
\i0 skeptical about one or two pet issues: sexuality and politics. They might think it morally acceptable to steal from a corporation (because they are already stealing from us) but they don\'92t think anyone should steal from them. \
	What is not often the case is that the portrait of the debonair immoralist is painted with any literary detail. Who is he? Where does he come from? Where are his family? If we answered these questions, we might learn something important about the abstract questions of moral motivation. \
	Moral psychologists study a phenomenon that, I think, we can all observe: growing up in a family and with friends causes a majority of moral development. We learn our first deontological rules from our parents. We first have the fear of God put in us, those who fear God, by our God-fearing parents. But we also learn our first utilitarian principles from our siblings, friends, classmates, playmates, distant cousins, and \'97 in a word, our peers. \
	Davidson and Youniss, interpreting Piaget\'92s 
\i The Moral Judgment of the Child
\i0 , argue that \'93the construction of identity and the construction of morality are aspects of the same construction.\'94 (1991, 112). In other words, MacIntyre\'92s close tie between the self (as a narrative unity), practical reason, and morality is justifiable on empirical psychological grounds as well. \
	Apply this close tie to the amoralist or the moral skeptic. Do they have a home country, a family? John \'93Jack\'94 Ames from Marilynn Robinson\'92s 
\i Gilead 
\i0 is an apparent amoralist. Yet we know his family, the Boughton family, well. The unconditional love that Lila and the elder John Ames have for Jack eventually does seem to have an effect on him. But his behavior is both an expression of his self and forms his (new, different) self. \
	The question \'93why be moral?\'94 is, for those with a clear sense of self and a strong community, almost unthinkable. Not that there is no answer, but that the answer is so obvious the question becomes bizarre and bewildering. So, briefly, for MacIntyre, we can say that the answer to \'93why be moral?\'94 in the proper social and ethical context is for us like the question \'93Why be yourself?\'94 An answer may be possible, but it would be halting, awkward, and difficult. More likely than answering such a question, the virtuous agent with a clear sense of self rooted in a narrative about the community and the agent\'92s place within it would return the question, \'93Why would anyone ever consider 
\i not 
\i0 being themselves? Why would anyone ever consider 
\i not 
\i0 being moral?\'94 \
 \
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://E4F40DB3-D87A-429B-973B-CF67CC6F9909"}}{\fldrslt 
\b \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 Is virtue ethics a species of moral realism (if so, constructivist or stance-independent)? \
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Clearly, for MacIntyre, moral discourse 
\i can 
\i0 and 
\i should 
\i0 be a species of realism. But not all of it is. Namely, the kind of discourse that masks a will-to-power only pretends to realistic construal. 
\b \
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 What do evaluative terms mean?\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Evaluative terms are like functional terms; their meaning is, in part, a reference to the referent\'92s function or telos.\
\'93\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
teleological language is frequently used in biology in order to make statements about the functions of organs, about physiological processes, and about the behavior and actions of species and individuals.\'94 (Ernst Mayr, 1974)\
\'93Pittenridght\'94  that the objects of biological analysis are organizations (he calls them organism and, as such, are end-directed. Organization is more than mere order; order lacks end-directedness; organization 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
is 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
end-directed.\'94\
\
There are a host of homogenous classes that are spoken of in terms that might be teleological. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1.	}The turtle walked ashore to lay her eggs \'97 behavior of whole organism\
{\listtext	2.	}The kidney filtered blood \'97 function of organ within organism\
{\listtext	3.	}D\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
uring mitosis, a cell\'92s chromatic material is arranged in a single linear thread 
\i in order to ensure 
\i0 equal division of the smallest parts (Roux 1883) \'97 the function of a microbiological process\
\ls4\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	4.	}The torpedo in the warehouse is for shooting through water toward a target \'97 a potential end-directed behavior, a design
\b \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls5\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Is normativity natural? Is nature normative or teleological? (No Natural Teleology Objection)\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls6\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}What is human nature?  Is there a human nature? (No Human Nature Objection)\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls7\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}How do we know what is virtuous to do or be?\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 We have to listen to what our tradition tells us about what to do. If our present tradition is in crisis, then we may need to listen to what a rival tradition tells us about our present tradition. 
\b \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls8\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls9\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	5.	}Is virtue ethics a species of metaethical realism (if so, constructivist or stance-independent)? \
{\listtext	6.	}What do evaluative terms mean? (Non-Cognitivism Challenge)\
{\listtext	7.	}How do we know what is virtuous to do or be? (Moral Disagreement Objection)\
{\listtext	8.	}Is normativity natural? Is nature normative or teleological? (No Natural Teleology Objection)\
{\listtext	9.	}What is human nature?  Is there a human nature? (No Human Nature Objection)\
{\listtext	10.	}What is rationality? (No Sui Generis Rationality Objection)\
{\listtext	11.	}Is virtue talk a better fit for theism or atheism?  (No God Objection)}}}