{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green26\blue26;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1

\f0\b\fs28 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Here's the pitch:\'a0
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
In the last 60 years in analytic philosophy, virtue ethics has achieved a kind of ascendancy. According to the Chalmers survey, 18% (almost a fifth) of analytic philosophers are virtue ethicists (with only 25% and 23% avowing deontology or consequentialism, the rest declined those categories). But what exact doctrines "virtue ethics" is supposed to entail is far from clear. Worse, the foundations of virtue ethics are still largely unexplored. Second order metaethical debates pretend to neutrality with respect to first-order normative ethical theories like consequentialism or virtue ethics. \'a0\
\
And yet, one's conclusions about metaethical foundations do bear natural relations to specific ethical theories. Moore's 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Principia, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
a metaethical source text, is consequentialist, and many naturalist realists (like Boyd and Railton) and even non-cognitivists (like Mackie) are consequentialists. Non-naturalists tend to be realists (like Shaffer-Lanau) and divine command theorists (like Robert Adams) or deontologists (like Kant, who is a non-naturalist with respect to ethics if not metaphysics).\'a0\
\
So how might the core commitments of virtue ethics affect one's conclusion about metaethical foundations? The virtue ethicist is committed, minimally, to virtue talk, to the conceptual definition of virtue as somehow beneficial (Hursthouse). Also, she is committed to notions of practical wisdom (Annas). Although some are not eudaimonists (Stephen Brown), traditional virtue ethics is committed to the notion that happiness is the telos of human life or at least that human life has a telos (MacIntyre).\'a0\
\'a0\
Debates between moral realism and anti-realism (whether any "values" are real), objectivism or subjectivism (whether real values are "stance-independent"), naturalism and non-naturalism (whether moral facts are natural facts), as well as moral motivation (whether moral considerations are necessarily motivating), moral epistemology (whether and how we know moral truth) -- all need to be given a treatment from the assumption that (a plausible version of) the core commitments of virtue ethics are true.\
\
It would be impossible or perhaps foolhardy for me to attempt a full treatment. Instead, 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
I work toward this end
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 by examining six influential virtue ethicists to discover their positions (if any) on these metaethical debates, and the strengths and weaknesses of their metaethical positions. Those six virtue ethicists are: Alasdair MacIntyre, Philippa Foot, Rosalind Hursthouse, John McDowell, Stephen Brown, and Robert Adams. First, I briefly review the virtue theory of Aristotle and the historical ascendancy of the Aristotelian virtue tradition in the English-speaking philosophy (via Elizabeth Anscombe, Peter Geach, and others).\'a0\
\
Secondly, I give a chapter to each thinker, respecting their own metaethical concerns but also attempting to build toward a coherent foundation of virtue.\'a0\
\
First, I examine Alasdair MacIntyre especially his critique of expressivism and his notion that telos is the heart and soul of the Aristotelian ethical tradition.Second, I examine Foot's language-centered theory of "goodness" and her critique of Moore's assumption that ethics is all about the predicate "good." Third, I examine Rosalind Hursthouse's appropriation of (and differences from) Foot, and her account of moral objectivity and moral naturalism. \'a0Fourth, I examine John McDowell's philosophical anthropology of "second nature" in the context of his "liberal naturalism", especially his unique brand of idealism or inter-subjectivism as it pertains to practical reason. Fifth, I examine Stephen Brown's reductive, Darwinian virtue ethics, especially his rejection of eudaemonia, his solution to the "is/ought" gap, and his argument that reproduction is the function of humanity. Sixth, I examine Robert Adams supernaturalistic, theistic virtue ethics, especially his avowal of divine command theory, his notion of "excellence", and how the unity and transcendence of the good informs his metaethical theory.\
\
In the third section, I present my own contribution. I synthesize what I take to be what is correct in each of these thinkers and reject what I take to be faulty or implausible, building (or beginning) an account that constitutes a metaethical foundation of virtue. \'a0This synthesis shows that seemingly disparate notions actually gather themselves into 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
two
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 coherent and competing accounts. Both of which are non-reductive, morally realist accounts, but differ especially with respect to the metaphysical status of nature, God, and human nature. Finally, I articulate the theoretical costs and benefits of each in light of the broader debate between theism and metaphysical naturalism.\'a0\
}