{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 1. Target Debates featuring Confusions about Morality, Rationality, and Normativity\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f1\b0\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93These are 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
normative 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
concepts, concepts \'93fraught with ought\'94, as Wilfrid Sellars put it: moral concepts, concepts of rationality, concepts of the shameful or the enviable, of meriting credence or meriting aesthetic admiration, and other concepts.\'94
\f2\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f1\fs26 Gibbard, 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Thinking how to live, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
x.
\f2\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f1\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Richard Boyd is an ethical naturalist. That is, he is the kind of ethical or moral realist who thinks moral terms refer and moral judgments are truth evaluable. But he thinks moral terms refer to natural facts and moral judgments are true just in case they correctly denote the natural facts. So, for example, a particular society\'92s law may be bad if, as a direct consequence of following that law, many people in the given society are deprived of adequate food. Certain kinds of natural objects (fruits, vegetables, etc.) are food for humans; and such food is, as a matter of natural fact, 
\i good 
\i0 for humans \'97 it results in our surviving and living well. Laws that deprive people of adequate food deprive people of a good, and are themselves not good. \
Boyd doesn\'92t himself get into the details of what kinds of things are good or bad for people but I hope this is and example he would find in keeping with the spirit of his metaethical theory. \
\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 The fact / value split is actually the split between descriptive facts and normative facts. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Peter Schaber has argued that normative facts are what make true normative sentences true. The (correct) deliverances of practical reason 
\i also 
\i0 track reality, have a world-mind direction of fit \'97 but they track normative facts rather than descriptive facts. One can intelligibly wonder, \'93I desire X, but ought I to desire X? Is X really desirable? Is it the kind of thing that people (or at least people like me) ought to desire?\'94 
\b \
}