{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Diagnosis: The loss of Telos\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Rather than rushing to build our moral theory on a ready-made notion of \'93rationality,\'94 we have to re-think both at the same time. \
MacIntyre\'92s diagnosis is that western civilization has lost the notion of 
\i telos. 
\i0 Telos is one of three key elements of the previous, successful Aristotelian tradition. The three part scheme of \'93human-nature-as-it-happens-to-be\'94 and \'93human-nature-as-it-could-be-if-it-realized-its-telos\'94 and the \'93precepts of rational ethics as the means for the transition from one to the other\'94 is essentially what {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://F6E39A78-C26A-4459-B002-62C63FA76EC0"}}{\fldrslt Aristotle lays out in 
\i Nicomachean Ethics.}}
\f1 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0 As we have seen in Chapter 2. 
\f1 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\i   
\i0 Moral discourse pre-Enlightenment consisted of examining human nature, theorizing about human nature after realizing its telos, and coordinating the journey from one to the other by means of human practical agency, including rules of morality, prudence, and politics but (especially) character traits.\
Without 
\i telos, 
\i0 the scheme falls apart. The study of human nature as it is leads to despair; recommending the same, classical virtues becomes an exercise in arbitrariness or browbeating. \
The loss of telos means that modern moralities inherent a set of virtues or rational moral precepts and a definition of human nature and a presumption that these two are essential elements in morality \'97 but that they can no longer make sense of their morality as a whole. \
He summarizes in the central chapter of 
\i After Virtue
\i0 : \'93A key part of my thesis has been that modern moral utterance and practice can only be understood as a series of fragmented survivals from an older past and that the insoluble problems which they have generated for modern moral theorists will remain insoluble until this is well understood. If the deontological character of moral judgments is the ghost of conceptions of divine law which are quite alien to the metaphysics of modernity and if the teleological character is similarly the ghost of conceptions of human nature and activity which are equally not at home in the modern world, we should expect the problems of understanding and of assigning an intelligible status to moral judgments both continually to arise and as continually to prove inhospitable to philosophical solutions.\'94 (1984, 111)\
Nietzsche gives the lie to all Enlightenment moralities. They try to set up a rational basis for morality but cannot. They try to place \'93reason\'94 on high but this is only a mask for the will to power.  The Enlightenment moralities were tried and found wanting. But the Aristotelian tradition that the Enlightenment abandoned still may be tried and found true. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://4E9A8DCC-71B7-4E11-8EDE-4C64D0F3D407"}}{\fldrslt \cf0 Why did the Enlightenment thinkers lose faith in telos? There are empirical and scientific arguments that teleology is natural. There are philosophical arguments and common sense appearances. \
But the older Aristotelian tradition was in crisis. And the Enlightenment thinkers found a way to establish a new, rival tradition. Bacon and others expunged teleology from their mechanical world-picture. }}\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Nietzsche or Aristotle\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 If MacIntyre\'92s deconstructive argument is correct, then modern moralities like deontology and utilitarianism (including all their trappings and purport of objectivity) are just as expressivistic as emotivism. \
There are two possible prognoses of this illness. The first is to abandon the purport of objectivity. This option follows expressivism and, ultimately, ends with Nietzsche. We unmask all rational justifications of morality. We opt for cunning rather than wisdom; amplify our means to deteriorated ends. Obviously, MacIntyre does not think Nietzsche is right about morality nor rationality. Rather, MacIntyre opts for Aristotle. \
The second prognosis is to abandon the fiction of total, individual, community-less, autonomy. If we see ourselves, again, as members of a community within a shared tradition, with shared origins, goals, and standards, then the objectivity and rational basis of morality becomes intelligible again. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
Aristotle\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Revisiting Aristotle\'92s ethics as a seminal text of the \'93Aristotelian tradition\'94, MacIntyre finds that \'93Human beings, like the members of all other species, have a specific nature; and that nature is such that they have certain aims and goals, such that they move by nature towards a specific 
\i telos
\i0 . The good is defined in terms of their specific characteristics.\'94 (148 %)\
For Aristotle, as we have seen, the virtues are \'93precisely those qualities the possession of which will enable an individual to achieve 
\i eudaemonia 
\i0 and the lack of which will frustrate his movement toward that 
\i telos.
\i0 \'94 (148 %)\
The right action may be done without the relevant virtue being the cause. But the virtue in a person is the cause of the correct end of purposive action. \
For Kant, acting against inclination (if need be) was an important element of having a moral motive, a motive from rational duty. But for Aristotle, inclinations themselves can be trained. They can be helpmeets toward doing one\'92s duty. \
A virtuous person obeys civil laws (150 %). At the same time, there are \'93absolute prohibited\'94 actions. Such actions warrant exile. Absolute prohibitions are not based on an absolute divine law, but on absolute limits of human nature beyond which the agent is no longer even a human being. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 The Scheme Restored\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 If the Aristotelian tradition restores 
\i telos 
\i0 to moral philosophy, what difference does it make? What is that telos, and how does virtue contribute to it? \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Human Nature
\b0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Humans can be excellent or the opposite of excellent. We are practical reasoners who make judgments of true and false and also make judgments upon which we act. Our excellence depends in part upon our effectiveness in pursuing what we judge to be good but also in part on what we judge to be good. Our excellence also depends, in part, on the social role we play within our tradition and over our whole life. So the virtues are needed for each of our roles and practices, as well as for life (human life) as a whole. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 What is a virtue? 
\b0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 	So what is a virtue, in this light? For MacIntyre a virtue is an \'93acquired human quality.\'94 So, virtues are good for 
\i humans 
\i0  ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://2A5E455D-5895-4C65-8F64-58421C366177"}}{\fldrslt rather than those qualities that are good for plants, environments, etc.). }}Virtues are 
\i acquired 
\i0 rather than somehow 
\i automatic 
\i0 like breathing or instinctual like avoiding pain. But which qualities? A virtue is an acquired human quality that enables its possessor \'93to achieve those goods which are internal to practices\'94 (MacIntyre 1984, 191). The absence of virtue \'93effectively prevents\'94 achieving the goods internal to practices. \
	So what is the term of art, \'93practice\'94? A practice is an activity carried out in a community of other practitioners according to common standards, a common history, and common ends (teloi). Lutz summarizes MacIntyre\'92s famous passage in this way: A practice is \'93(1) a complex social activity that (2) enables participants to gain goods internal to the practice. (3) Participants achieve excellence in practices by gaining the internal goods. When participants achieve excellence, (4) the social understandings of excellence in the practice, of the goods of the practice, and of the possibility of achieving excellence in the practice are systematically extended.\'94 (Lutz, 
\i After Virtue 
\i0 187). \
	 {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://4277518B-5BAF-4743-A25E-9D33F28179B7"}}{\fldrslt Examples include chess, medicine, farming, politics. }}So, in a bit more detail: farmers are a community of practitioners who belong to a broader tradition of cultivating land for food and other goods (water, wood, game hunting, or what have you). The goods internal to farming are obvious products like wheat, grapes, corn, tobacco, perhaps others. There are standards by which farmers judge themselves and each other as excelling or failing in the understood ends. Those qualities that enable farmers to farm well are virtues. Farming is a tradition. One joins the community through apprenticeship and becomes subject to the standards of that community. \
	MacIntyre\'92s favored example of a practice is political activity. Political activity can be done for reasons internal or external to the practice. External goods that can come from a career engaging in political activity are goods like fame, power, prestige, or book deals. Excellence in attaining these goods, however, does not constitute virtue. The internal goods of political activity are a free and happy polity. \
	Virtues are those qualities by which the practitioner overcomes the temptation to pursue external goods. \
	But thus far, the definition of a practice virtually begs to be read as a type of relativism. Is torture a practice? Is grand theft auto a practice that one can be excellent at? It certainly seems reasonable to think one can be an effective or ineffective car thief. But MacIntyre denies being a relativist (MacIntyre, 
\i After Virtue 
\i0 (Prologue) xii-xiii). {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://69288979-5338-4EC8-8EAF-F0704E7049CD"}}{\fldrslt His response to the charge or relativism obliges him to give a brief account of how and why someone from a tradition might evaluative her own tradition, by provisionally adopting via philosophical imagination the terms and way of thinking of a rival tradition.}} Even so, there might be practices that are evil. So an adequate account of virtue that does justice to the assumption that virtues are good for the possessor \
	But there is more to virtue than the excellence relative to a particular practice. Practices are indeed indexed to social activities. So the \'93second level\'94 of virtue are qualities indexed to individual agents. At this second level, virtues are qualities to avoid temptations away from pursuing what is best in the practices that partly constitute life and in life as a whole (201). \
	This second level is inadequate since humans are individuals but not 
\i merely 
\i0 individuals. The \'93detachable self\'94 that divorces itself from the past and from community is not the real self. MacIntyre\'92s example is the present day black American whose identity is in part defined by the relationship of 18\super th\nosupersub  century blacks to 18\super th\nosupersub  century whites, or present day Irishman whose identity is in part defined by the relationship of 18\super th\nosupersub  century Irish to 18\super th\nosupersub  century English. It is false to assert that my identity has nothing to do what what happened in the past. \
	There is a third level. That level is the social dimension. Since some practices are not individualistic, neither are virtues individualistic. Rather, \
	\'93\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The virtues find their point and purpose not only in sustaining those relationships necessary if the variety of goods internal to practices are to be achieved and not only in sustaining the form of an individual life in which that individual may seek out his or her good as the  of his or her whole life, but also in sustaining those traditions which provide both practices and individual lives with their necessary historical context\'94 (MacIntyre, 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
After Virtue
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. 223%).\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
	We may summarize MacIntyre\'92s concept of virtue as a quality of human beings, but human beings considered under three aspects: humans are considered as social animals, as individuals, and as social role-players. \
	With all three aspects in view, we can see that the most general virtuous qualities contribute to the flourishing of human being 
\i qua 
\i0 practical reasoner. The practice of practical reasoning is a universal human practice. The \'93human nature\'94 that is universally distributed across each member of our species is the capacity (sometimes unrealized) to become practical reasoners. Practical reasoners is what we 
\i are. 
\i0 Not just 
\i homo sapiens sapiens, 
\i0 but {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://B91159E1-9739-4D49-82DB-CF567A7A910E"}}{\fldrslt man}} who thinks what to do. \
	Narrowing our scope from this most broad level, other virtues contribute to excellence in various practices relating to social roles and to individual agency. These are an overlapping set of virtues. \
	We must be clear that 
\i simply \'93emphasizing\'94 
\i0 virtue or placing ethical primacy on virtues is not enough to restore the Aristotelian tradition. We can easily, and some already have, co-opt virtue talk within a teleological nihilism that renders such talk expressive of personal (foundationless) moral preferences or a will to power. Some readers indeed will read my case in these chapters as expressive of my personal moral preferences or a power play. I deny the charge. But it may be impossible to convince some that my denial of the charge is best explained by my innocence, rather than some Machiavellian strategy of keeping a will to power secret in hopes of increasing the chances it will come off. Virtue, outside of a context of end-directed human nature, MacIntyre thinks is just as hopeless as trying to build a justified agreement or intelligible disagremeent on stipulative concepts of rationality, duty, or happiness. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 What is our telos?
\b0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 The concept of telos is an important unifying element in ethical theory. He admits that defining virtues in terms of practices necessitates questioning whether life 
\i as a whole 
\i0 can be virtuous \'97 the virtue of \'93integrity or constancy\'85 of singleness of purpose in a whole life\'94 (203%). But integrity is not identical to happiness. \
	Contemporary thinking fragments human life into distinct stages (childhood, maturity, old age) rather than keeping synoptic vision of human life as a unity; contemporary thinking also fragments the whole life into a series of atomized actions, and fragments the individual human self (the one living the life) into atomized social roles. \
	By contrast, a more accurate picture of human life is that of a narrative. (
\i After Virtue, 
\i0 Chp. 15). Narrative is not \'93disguise or decoration\'94 but an essential feature of the working of our minds and (arguably) an essential feature of the unfolding of reality through time. \
	For us, the end (terminus) of our narrative is death. And as a narrative it has 
\i ends 
\i0 (goals). \'93We live out our lives, both individually and in our relationships with each other, in the light of certain conception of a possible shared future, a future in which certain possibilities beckon us forward and others repel us, some seem already foreclosed and others perhaps inevitable\'94 (215%). The unity of that narrative lies not only in our identity as a central character of our story, and our place in larger narrative contexts, but in the single 
\i telos 
\i0 governing all the moments of our \'93quest.\'94 \
	Of course, quests do not always achieve their object. The narrative of human life always reaches its 
\i end 
\i0 (in death) but doesn\'92t always reach its 
\i end
\i0  (in success, achievement of telos).\
	The goods available \'93in and through [various] practices\'94 are achievable by various virtues; but what about the simple, unified and unifying question: \'93What is good for me?\'94 (218). What is good, all things considered? \
	The virtues needed for \'93integrity,\'94 for a totalized and unified good as sought and perhaps achieved in my own life, are something over and above the virtues needed within various practices. \'93The virtues therefore are to be understood as those dispositions which will not only sustain practices and enable us to achieve the goods internal to practices, but which will also sustain us in the relevant kind of quest for the good, by enabling us to overcome th charms, dangers, temptations and distractions which we encounter, and which will furnish us with increasing self-knowledge and increasing knowledge of the good\'94 (219%). \
	These higher-order virtues are the context for and hence limit and guide the other lower-order virtues. Still further, social and political virtues are also the context, limit, and guide to individual virtues. Social and political virtues are \'93required to sustain the kind of households and the kind of political communities in which men and women can seek for the good together and the virtues necessary for philosophical enquiry about the character of the good\'94 (219). \
	This reasoning leads MacIntyre to the following \'93provisional\'94 conception of our human 
\i telos: 
\i0 \'93The good life for man is the life spent in seeking for the good life for man, and the virtues necessary for the seeking are those which will enable us to understand what more and what else the good life for man is\'94 (210). So our telos is to be free to pursue our telos. But the virtues needed to achieve this (extremely indeterminate) goal, he suggests, may illumine \'93what else\'94 our telos consists in. \
	MacIntyre is not a eudaemonist. At least, he is not obviously a straightforward eudaemonist. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls2\ilvl0
\f2 \cf0 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	
\b What is phronesis/practical reason and practical wisdom?\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 For a virtuous agent to develop virtues, she must be practically wise. She must, at least, be practical. The centrality of practical reason is one of MacIntyre\'92s recurring points. There is a close connection, he argues, between moral reasoning (narrowly about what is right and wrong) and practical reasoning (broadly about what to do). As Lutz puts it: \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93Modern moral philosophy separates moral reasoning about duties and obligations from practical reasoning about ends and practical deliberation about the means to one\'92s ends, and in doing so it separates morality from practice. Kant separates moral and practical reasoning explicitly in 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The Critique of Pure Reason
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 (
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Critique of Pure Reason
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, A800/B828\'96A819/B847) and in 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
(First Section, pp. 393-405.); Mill makes the same separation in 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Utilitarianism
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 (chapter 2).\'94 \
Modern moral philosophers had explicitly severed the connection. But if people\'92s avowed 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
reasons for action 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
were simply a subset of their 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
reasons 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
in general (including reasons to believe
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
feel, do, be) then such a severing is not a clear distinction but a violence. \
Lutz continues: \'93For Aristotle, moral philosophy is a study of practical reasoning, and the excellences or virtues that Aristotle recommends in the 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Nicomachean Ethics
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 are the intellectual and moral excellences that make a moral agent effective as an independent practical reasoner. 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
AV
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 criticizes modern liberal individualism and scientific determinism for separating practical reasoning from morality and political life; it proposes instead a return to Aristotelian ethics and politics.\'94 (Lutz %) \
In 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Dependent Rational Animals, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
MacIntyre emphasis that prudence is required to enable an agent to apply rules well (93). In the absence of rules, the prudent person can figure out what to do; and in the presence of irrelevant general rules the prudent person can judge that they are irrelevant and temporarily disregard them. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The Concept of Tradition\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The concept of tradition does important work for MacIntyre. A tradition is not mere conservatism of Burke or contemporary political pundits; that kind of conservatism is part of the broader tradition of liberal individualism he critiques. He calls a living tradition \'93an historically extended, socially embodied argument, and an argument precisely in part about the goods which constitute that tradition\'94 (222%). \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
After Virtue Outro\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://9E061F3B-387B-40BF-B48B-142B4D4B5F05"}}{\fldrslt 
\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
MacIntyre began his career in the 1970s as a Marxist critiquing \'93modern liberal individualism\'94 \'97 a stand in for many ideologies. Eventually however, he rejected in Marxism as just another form of modern liberal individualism. He turned to Aristotle's ethics as a school of thought and the tradition in which moral inquiry, and the development of rationality could actually take place. Since 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
After Virtue, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
we can read it's works as trying to complete the defense of this project.
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
}}\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
}