{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl320\sa240

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The theory/practice dissonance problem.\'a0
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Before addressing the specific objections to virtue ethics, I would like to address a very general one. And that is simply the who cares question. Why would anyone care to include virtue talk in their ethical theory?\
So my first task is to motivate virtue talk in general. There are very different ways of doing this.\
A religious writer might point out that virtue talk is part of the sacred text (I Peter 1:7). A secular writer might point out that virtue talk by contrast offers an alternative to theistic or divine law moralities (Anscombe 1967). \
My starting point will be neither of these. I will start by proposing that virtue ethics solves a very widespread type of problem. I called this problem the theory/practice dissonance problem.\
Roughly, this problem occurs when the ethical theory that one avows, perhaps in public and perhaps in writing, if one is a professional academic, varies from or even contradicts the ethical principles and maxims one actually takes for guidance and once daily affairs.\
And so, for instance, this problem occurs when a self-declared utilitarian on paper declares in conversation that here she will not give everyone in the class an a for no reason because doing so would be "just wrong." I take it that utilitarianism if true means that very few actions if any are just wrong , considered as apart from any positive consequences that may result.\'a0\
Or suppose that ones ethical practice is guided in large part by the advice and counsel one recieved from ones parents. Jose thinks his parents were pretty much right about pretty much everything pertaining to how to live a successful and satisfying life, let's suppose. So Jose lives through some difficult and morally ambiguous situations by sticking faithfully to the plain instructions that he received growing up. These instructions form a set that is not part of a coherent metaphysical system nor is each member of the set necessarily coherent with each other, but he gets by. Meanwhile, in the course of studying philosophy, say, Juan develops alongside this practical, ad hoc, and messy practice a clear and coherent ethical theory that he never actually uses.\
This is the dissonance I mean.\
Many people, even philosophers but especially bioethicists, appeal to "common morality". That set of items universally considered right or wrong by all people in all cultures at all times. This kind of bottom up morality is much more useful than it is theoretically satisfying.\
So let's say that the desideratum and virtue for an ethical practice is its usefulness, it's guidance, it's livability; the desideratum and virtue of an ethical theory is its clarity, consistency, and coherence with ones overall world picture.\'a0\
Virtue theory is the best of both worlds. It is a bottom up theory (of course justice is a virtue!) and a top down theory (now let's give a rigorous definition of justice as everyone doing their own business or everyone acting impartially )\
That is one major motivation to begin with virtue talk or to incorporate it into ones current ethical thinking.\'a0\
Starting here also motivates us to avoid letting our abstract ethical theorizing five out of balance in either of two ways. We do not want our theory to become so theoretical it becomes impracticable or useless; nor do we want to preserve dozens of our common sense ethical notions untouched by our theory, so many brute facts unsynthesized and unreflectively taken in but not digested.\'a0}