{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
Reasons explain action. But the picture of an agent with a reason to \uc0\u966  who simply does \u966  is too simple. In any major decision, and many minor decisions, the agent is liable to be undecided, conflicted, confused, or otherwise \'93stuck\'94.   Conflicting reasons explain (many) conflicts within us between multiple motivation reasons or desirable objects. When I have some good reasons to, say, move out of state (a new job with higher pay, closer to family) and some good reasons to stay where I am (comfort with my job, better schools), I may need time and soul-searching to decide which set of reasons to act upon. Things kinds of conflicting sets of reasons let's call (non-tragic) practical dilemmas. The resolution of a practical dilemma is not usually an arbitrary spasmodic leap, a groundless fiat, an unconditioned election. Rather, the resolution of a practical dilemma is the discovery of a sufficiently greater number of reasons, or a few weightier reasons, in favor of one action or against the other. Even if I am merely "leaning toward" one path, this can be enough to settle things. \
Let's call the reason or set of reasons that tip the scale in favor of an action a conclusive reason (If there are many reasons, let's treat that set of reasons as a unified case in favor of the action.) Foot calls this the right thing to do 'a.t.c' -- all things considered. Quite obviously, some actions that recommend themselves and that are not morally wrong by any stretch of the imagination are sometimes not the thing to do, all things considered. Suppose I am craving a bagel for breakfast, and they are easily accessible from the bakery I pass on my way to work. I like the taste of bagels and this bakery is accessible are two perfectly unobjectionable reasons to go right ahead and eat the bagel for breakfast. But in context, contervailing reasons rule it out. Perhaps I am gluten-intolerant, so indulging my craving would fuzzy my thinking. The "all things considered" qualification just means that reasons for doing A are kept in view with reasons to avoid doing A, and that the conclusive reason or set of reasons is the one that, when I am being rational, eventually motivates me. \
A tragic dilemma is when I have (or appear to myself to have) a perfectly conclusive reason to do A and to not do A. }