{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 The topic of teleology has been and continues to be one of great controversy and high feeling. Simply disagreement is less common than vehement denial and denunciation. Clearly, something important is at stake here. \
MacIntyre has lead me to articulate and defend a notion of 
\i social teleology
\i0 . The
\i  Social Teleology Thesis 
\i0 is the proposition that human practices (individual and social) are necessarily, irreducibly, and indispensably end-directed.  This thesis both gives support to and derives support from a picture of human nature as necessarily social or political practical reasoners. I tried to offer analyses of this picture. I defended the end-directed structure of practical reasoning, and the view that 
\i what we are 
\i0 (at minimum) is creatures with the first-order potential to become \'93dependent rational animals\'94 who can more or less independently reason. \
So far, the 
\i Social Teleology Thesis 
\i0 is compatible with moral realism of two very different sorts: the first is the kind of \'93stance-independent\'94 moral realism that views fundamental moral facts \'97 like fundamental physical facts and fundamental mathematical facts \'97 as parts of reality that do not depend on human beings or human knowledge. The second is the kind of \'93stance-dependent\'94 constructivism that views fundamental moral facts as a function of some actual or ideal human agent or agents:  practical reasoning itself, the agreement of societies. \
Which }