{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf110
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### Solutions: Virtue ethics  ###\
\
Macintyre is widely considered to be a \'93critic of modernity.\'94 And he certainly is that. But he is widely considered by his detractors to be nothing but a critic. Anyone more than passingly familiar with his writings know he is also a powerful positive voice for *improving* modernity. His positive positions contribute toward continuing moral progress. At the risk of sounding paradoxical, we might put it this way: MacIntyre's positive ethical positions are *traditional* but not *nostalgic.* In fact, his definition of tradition as an ongoing, socially-embedded argument over time entails necessarily that moral inquiry is dynamic, progressive, and even *modern*. For, to be traditional is not to be past-oriented; to be traditional is to be staunchly future-oriented, since the business of life is not only the pursuit of our telos but the transmission of everything valuable and precious to the next generation. \
\
\
The "*After Virtue* Project" is mostly constructive and creative. But up to and including *After Virtue*, MacIntyre may be seen as working to articulate criticisms that lead eventually to his epistemological and moral crisis. *After Virtue* and many of the works after have emphasized how and why to restore the Aristotelian-Thomistic tradition of virtue. The sequels *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* and *Dependent Rational Animals* deepen and clarify MacIntyre\'92s commitment to that tradition and extend that tradition into the future. \
\
### Progress ###\
\
The solution toward which MacIntyre was inexorably lead over the years was that we moderns need to recover the broadly Aristotelian tradition of the virtues. \
\
But, again, we must beware a misunderstanding. Any talk of \'93returning\'94 is liable to sound nostalgic. MacIntyre's proposed solution is not an anti-progressive longing for the past. It is radically progressive. His solution is not to reverse progress but to abandon the standard of progress set up in the Enlightenment and to continue under an alternative standard of progress.\
\
While I defer a detailed discussion of tradition until below, here I will say that traditions are living debates between social communities across time. They are, by definition, *still alive*. Traditions are not dead memories of the past but the cutting edge of forward-facing communities actively involved in self-definition and the pursuit of goods. }