{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf110
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### Virtue ethicist?  ###\
\
Interestingly, though MacIntyre has contributed to contemporary virtue ethics and influenced many virtue ethicists, he denies the epithet himself. This is one reason his work is an excellent starting point for these chapters. If a coherent and intelligible and socially useful and personally enriching concept of virtue can be constructed within the confines of modern moral philosophy, then MacIntyre\'92s dire diagnosis is mistaken. If, however, his diagnosis is correct, then much of modern moral philosophy -- even modern virtue ethics -- has the same contagion. \
\
In a word, MacIntyre thinks that "human beings need the virtues" because they are intrinsically good and useful for transforming communities and persons.[@macintyre1999dependent] At the practical level of daily life, a small community (such as a family or town or university) does well to organize themselves around a common vision of what is good and a common conception of what qualities will help everyone to attain that good. Even though such a common vision of and pursuit of virtue is impossible to scale up indefinitely for 300+ millions people (in the U.S., for instance), it is possible and beneficial at smaller, local scales. And indeed, this is already happening. \
\
At the theoretical level of philosophical ethics, the concepts of virtue, practical wisdom, and happiness supply for moral theory what many modern moralities have not: a clear, coherent, useful, and justifiable theory that grounds a rational pursuit of the good life and resolvable moral disagreements. \
\
MacIntyre is first and foremost a philosopher of *practical reason*. I say "practical reason" rather than simply "ethics" or "morality" because his *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* and "Three Rival Versions of Moral Inquiry* take up themes about rationality per se, while *After Virtue* and *Dependent Rational Animals* follow the Aristotelian pattern of treating ethical issues as species of practical rationality. \
\
In the following sections, I will attempt to trace in more detail his account of virtue and his account of how virtue and practical rationality are partially constituted by the traditions in which we live and move and have our being. \
\
}