{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\})}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00);}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid2\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid3\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li2160\lin2160 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 My metaethical theory is a positive version of virtue ethical theory. Virtue theories provide strong explanatory power over a range of phenomena of human thought, action, and speech. But before I say more, I need to answer what is the goal of metanormative inquiry. What are we trying to explain? \
\

\b Just the word \'91good\'92? 
\b0 \
The way some metaethicists talk you would think the only goal is to explain the semantics and pragmatics of our use of the word \'91good\'92 and that\'92s the end of it. \
This myopeia is partly this is due, I think, to Moore\'92s prefatory statement in 
\i Principia Ethica 
\i0 that the primary goal of ethics is to explain why we call things good when we call them good. \
Also, good is specific enough that we actually do use it in everyday speech (we speak of our \'93good students\'94) and in philosophical discourse (Plato\'92s form of the good, Kant\'92s good will) while remaining general enough to represent simply the \'93positive\'94 or \'93up\'94 side of evaluative discourse about anything.\
But restricting metaethical inquiry to investigating our use of that one term is a mistake. To reduce all the ways in which our life is dappled with judgments of value, pursuit of what is worthy, avoidance of what is base or trivial to \'91evaluative discourse\'92 is a mistake. Surely, we want to explain value talk. But we also want to explain 
\i the things 
\i0 we talk about evaluatively. To me it seems a laughable mistake. It is as if a metabiologist thought she could assert something meaningful and interesting about giraffes, hippopotami, bacteria, humans, sea slugs, and pterodactyls by explaining \'91life talk.\'92  Surely there is something interesting going on when we use the same word (\'91alive\'92 or \'91living\'92) about such a diverse set of creatures but don\'92t use it about crystals, solar systems, or the wind. But to ignore all the particularities of different life forms in their highly various manifestation is to ignore all the particularities and varieties of \'91life talk.\'92 \
\

\b Not not all human goodness is moral goodness
\b0 \
Another reason to think metaethical inquiry is indistinguishable from metanormative inquiry as a whole. We need to be able to explain more than evaluations commonly labeled as \'91moral\'92. For example, we should want an explanation for why we think stupidity is bad even if it is not morally bad. \
For these reasons, metaethical inquiry is part and parcel of a global metanormative theory that seeks to explain all kinds of evaluations, evaluative judgments, evaluative discourse,
\i  and 
\i0 is sensitive to the variety of objects which we evaluate. \
\

\b The problem of agreement
\b0 \
There is another criterion that sets a limit on, and a research goal for, metaethical inquiry. I call this the Problem of Agreement. A metaethical theory should explain why humans so often and so globally agree on certain value judgments. It should explain moral platitudes entrenched in \'93folk morality\'94 and why they seem so right even to sophisticates and intellectuals. I am thinking of platitudes like 
\i cruelty is wrong 
\i0 but also ones like 
\i friendship is valuable 
\i0 and 
\i family first
\i0 .  Even if such platitudes turn out to be norm-expressions rather than propositional judgments, or truth-apt but not true, they had better turn out to be something very like the truth. Simon Blackburn is one who shoulders the burden of showing why, given that realism is basically wrong, realist talk is so ubiquitous. The problem of agreement should receive no shorter shrift than the so-called problem of disagreement{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://3241C981-E64C-46BA-A2DD-DE365D134D1A"}}{\fldrslt , a phenomenon that underwrites far more wild interpretations than is justifiable}}.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Cf. David Enoch, \'93How is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism?\'94 %
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  \
\

\b Criteria are falsifiable and hence negotiable
\b0 \
I do not wish to make my criteria seem non-negotiable. An argument could be made to show why what I have called a puzzling phenomenon is not so. Either the alleged phenomenon doesn\'92t happen or it\'92s just my idiosyncratic perspective that makes it puzzling.  I think these are negotiable but right. \
\

\b Why am I sometimes wrong? \

\b0 An example of a criterion that we might want to begin with but, upon reflection, should abandon: why am I always right and others always wrong? This is the kind of question many of us, if we are honest, have set about trying to answer at some point or another. A better criterion is that my ethical theory should explain why I am sometimes or even usually right, but why I can be mistaken. It should even, as a practical theory, or at least as a theory when applied, help me to 
\i identify 
\i0 mistakes and correct them. \
Or we might have asked: Why is my group right and others always wrong? (Michael Shermer\'92s 
\i Why People Believe Weird Things 
\i0 is an exercise in this kind of futility.) Also Nietzsche\'92s sardonic essay \'93Why I am so Wise\'94?) The question is not why are \'93they\'94 wrong and \'93we\'94 are right but given that we are mostly right, how might we be going wrong? Given that \'93they\'94 are mostly wrong, how might they be getting it partially right? \
\

\b The Criteria for metanormative theory
\b0 \
The criteria suggested as non-negotiable explananda are five. In brief, they are: the unity and diversity of ways things can be good; the unity and diversity of ways 
\i humans
\i0  can be good; the way goods can be good for one or many humans; our occasional certainty about what is good; our mistakes about what is good; our amazing range of failures and successes in actually becoming good; \
\

\b The Purport of Objectivity\

\b0 Michael Smith summarizes one of the two \'94features of morality" as "we seem to think moral questions have correct answers; that the correct answers are made correct by objective moral facts" (Smith, 1994, 8). Call this \
\

\b The Post-Kantian Picture\

\b0 This picture of objectivity of value, of moral facts consisting of a set of facts \'93in the world\'94 to which our representational epistemic states can correspond or fail to correspond, and which make the truth of our evaluative propositions, is itself a picture of the world and our place in it that is subject to controversy (Rosen, \'93Objectivity and Modern Idealism\'94). Once you accept a picture of reality in which there is a mind/world gap, then you are obligated to overcome the gap or explain it away. I endorse this picture of the world, even if it seems to violate a tenet of naturalism that has become for Rosen \'93philosophical common sense\'94. The reasons for endorsing that picture will fill up many pages below. \
\

\b \
The Purport of Certainty \

\b0 Ethics is a less precise science than geometry. Aristotle said that we ought to be content with the degree of clarity afforded by the subject, since any 
\i more 
\i0 clarity would actually be less clear. To capture a fuzzy reality our account must be correspondingly fuzzy. To capture a fuzzy reality too clearly is to falsify the account. \
Descartes and Kant deplored the less-than-mathematical precision of philosophy (and hence ethics). They sought to make it 
\i either 
\i0 just as mathematically precise as geometry, astronomy, physics, logic, algebra or else deny it the honorific title of a science. \
Our metaethics must answer this question: should ethical inquiry be as precise as other forms of systematic, organized, theoretical knowledge? I do not think so, but I will not attempt a full defense here. Instead I will point to one phenomenon I take to be in need of explanation. \
Let it be given that ethics is more fuzzy and less precise than, say, physics or astronomy or archaeology. In this case, it makes sense that many of our evaluative judgments are tentative, probing, hypothetical, provisional. When I ask undergraduates whether they are for or against abortion, say, or for or against Obamacare, they often express bewilderment, 
\i aporia, 
\i0 a desire to learn the various reasonable positions, a sensitivity to objections and counterarguments, the provisional nature of their conclusions, the hypotheses they inherited from friends, family, or pastors. When I ask them whether they are going to go into a career or family life, into sciences or humanities, live near family or move away, they express uncertainty in no uncertain terms. This is as it should be. We are often (rightfully) unsure what is right and what is wrong, both personally and politically, both morally and prudentially. It takes time and many hours of deliberation to sort through what to do and what to believe.\
Even so, there are some evaluative judgments about which we tend to be more certain than even factual judgments. And our metaethical theory should account for the fact. \
For instance, I am more certain that I ought to honor my father's memory than I am sure about his birthday (he was adopted and his parents memory agreed with one birth certificate but disagreed with another). I am more certain that the world is beautiful than that gluons (as conceived by present day physics) exist. I am more clear that I ought to care for my children than I am that Pluto is or is not a planet. I am more justified in believing that I ought to trust my wife\'92s fidelity when I am absent than I am justified in believing that most of the dinosaurs were eradicated by a catastrophe. All of my factual beliefs, in these cases, are open to more empirical evidence and new theorizing. But my evaluative beliefs, in these cases, are case closed.  \
I will put it even more strongly. Cruelty is wrong, kindness is good \'97 these are so true and so known to be true that I can hardly doubt them without ceasing to be myself.  To be open to reconsidering these platitudes constitutes a moral failing. \
I intentionally avoid controversial examples about which some people are so screachingly certain but about which others are equally certain about the opposite thesis. The point is not that certainty guarantees truth. The point is that 
\i some 
\i0 evaluations, as they seem to correspond to the objective facts, seem to be certainly right. So we ought to explain why we sometimes know what is true (that cruelty is bad) as well as the seeming knowledge of what the truth is 
\i about 
\i0 (the moral facts about kindness). So we must explain how and why 
\i s
\i0 ome evaluative judgments purport to be known with an incorrigible certainty while others purport to be only guessed at, hoped for, glimpsed \'93through a glass darkly.\'94\
\

\b The Four Explandanda
\b0 \
With these general considerations, I can give my explananda. For each explanandum I will give a bit more detail and a few examples of the kind of evaluative judgments I am thinking of, drawn from history, books, movies, my memory, or my own brain: \
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	1)	}
\b Unity and Diversity of Goods. 
\b0 We do not just evaluative people as good; we evaluate everything that exists and even things that don\'92t exist (\'93the Joker is a great villain; Bespin is a beautiful city). We evaluate living things as living well or poorly. We evaluate inorganic systems. We predicate not just goodness (\'93moral\'94 goodness) but order, harmony, truth, or beauty to inanimate things. Order and goodness are not identical but they are both \'93positive\'94 or \'93up\'94 values. So we must explain not only evaluative discourse about humans but about non-human objects (stars, rocks, forests), non-human animals (deer, dogs, buzzards), and systems (ecosystems, galaxies, molecules) according to normative canons other than moral ones. (Cf. (Adams, 
\i Finite and Infinite Goods
\i0 , Chapter 3 \'93Well-Being and Excellence\'94).  
\i \
\ls1\ilvl0
\i0 Some examples:\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}The stars are beautiful; the solar system is forming; Mt Shasta is beautiful when covered with snow; though hostile to us, the deep sea is a home (inorganic systems)\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}The ecosystem is healthy; the beehive is flourishing; borax is bad for ants; the rainforest is being raped;  (living systems)\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}The father and son are reconciling; their friendship has really lasted; she is rich; (human \'93non-moral\'94 goods)\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}It is rational to love truth; rational beings ought to proportion belief to the evidence; real scientists don't fabricate data; simultaneously to hold inconsistent beliefs makes one irrational; (human intellectual goods)\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}Virtue is its own reward; \'93we will not be satisfied until justice rolls down like waters and righteousness like a mighty stream\'94;  (human moral goods)\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	2)	}
\b Unity and Diversity of Human Goods. \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}Not just \'93moral\'94 but intellectual. 
\b0 We are judge ourselves and others on both our reason and practical reason. We judge our own and others thoughts and actions, beliefs and feelings. Practical reason gives reasons for practice \'97 that is, it means there is such a thing as rational action. Without practical reason, we are left with impractical reason and irrational activity. But, as we clearly judge, we see both. Michael smith says, regarding practicality, "moral judgments seem to be, or imply, opinions about the reasons we have for behaving in certain ways and, other things being equal, having such opinions is a matter of finding ourselves with a corresponding motivation to act" (Smith 1994, 6-7). Now, Smith himself thinks these features are opposite each other. Beliefs  \'97 correct or incorrect \'97 about facts are "utterly distinct" from desires, and never the twain shall meet. But my point here is that practical rationality is broader than narrowly \'93moral\'94 or even \'93ethical\'94 concerns viewed as a set of absolute prohibitions or imperatives binding on all humans as such. \
\pard\tx1660\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li2160\fi-2160\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl2\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}Sam is wise; Yuan is a good guy; those two may be cretins but they\'92re the smartest people in our department; parents ought to care for their children and children ought to respect their parents; friends ought to remain faithful even in times of sorrow and trouble; Jose was tempted but he did the right thing; Lindsay has earned it, I hope she enjoys the accolades; willfully to disregard the evidence for historical atrocities against people groups whom you happen to dislike is an intellectual and a moral error; ignoring evidence contradicting your hypothesis is an intellectual error; you are not a real scientist if you falsify evidence to support your hypothesis;  (evaluations of action and thought)\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1
\b \cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}Not just action, but character. 
\b0 I don\'92t want to prejudge how necessary virtue concepts are to explaining the way we actually think, but it seems to me a confirmable hypothesis that we judge ourselves and others on our character, habits, and overall way of life. We admire not only the good but the wise and look down on not only the wicked but the foolish. Furthermore, we judge ourselves and others as good, beautiful, faithful, friendly or the opposite of these, paradigmatically consists in judging not only their actions but especially their established character traits. A good person is one who has achieved a good set of character traits and employs or \'93activates\'94 them habitually; a bad person is the opposite
\i . 
\i0 The kind of person who earns our distrust is one who has proven reliably untrustworthy, who is reliably unreliable. \
\pard\tx1660\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li2160\fi-2160\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl2\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}Pat did well\'85 for once; what you did was wrong, but you\'92re not a bad person; Sam is wise those 9/11 firefighters were courageous; Cato is just. 
\b \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1
\b0 \cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}
\b Not just luck, but reaction. 
\b0 We hold ourselves and others accountable not for what luck has given them but for what we think, say, and do. We hold ourselves accountable, ultimately, for 
\i who we are 
\i0 insofar as that is a combination of what is out of our control (luck) as well as what is in our control. \
\pard\tx1660\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li2160\fi-2160\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl2\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}It\'92s terrible what happened to Susan, but she\'92s bearing up rather well; Even with all that wealth and privilege, she\'92s managed to turn herself into a wretch; \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}
\b Not just rational bipeds, but any rational being. 
\b0 Interestingly, we intuitively judge any hypothetical being the same way. We can judge the moral status of fictional villains like Galactus and the Joker or fictional heroes like Professor Xavier and Batman. Non-theists can judge whether a particular god as portrayed in literature or speech is admirable or not. If we ever discover extraterrestrial life say on Mars, we will not blame a bacterium for harming our astronauts nor praise one for curing terrestrial colds. If we discover or are discovered by extraterrestrial intelligence, however, we expect both to treat them with respect and to be treated with respect. If we ever meet with another intelligent life form \'97 whether god, angel, or Alpha Centurion \'97 we expect them to also obey the Golden Rule. The law of mutual respect or decency is not just a provincial terrestrial contract. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 {\listtext	3)	}Unity and diversity of human communities. 
\b0 I am not totally sure this is a separate criterion. But some goods we judge to be good relative to 
\i persons 
\i0 and others good for 
\i communities 
\i0 or groups (be they societies, cultures, peoples, nations, clubs, races, families, associations, or what have you). Sometimes these judgments are in tension, sometimes in harmony. \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}As a political animal, it is easier for me as an individual to flourish in a flourishing family, society, and state. \
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}It is easier for my family, society, or state to flourish if I am flourishing as an individual.  \
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}Sometimes the needs of the few outweigh the needs of the many: I ought to help my struggling first-generation college student to understand a concept even if the rest of the class already \'93gets it\'94. \
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}Sometimes the needs of the many outweigh the needs of the few: a majority vote in democratic society is sufficient to establish \'93the will of the people\'94, even if the minority are discontented. \
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}Sometimes the general welfare is incompatible with my personal welfare, or at least my pleasure and comfort. Sometimes I ought to prefer the general welfare at my own expense (I ought to recycle plastics and papers even if it means buying another recycling can from the city) while other times I ought to prefer my welfare to the general welfare (when accepting a raise, I ought to use the money for my own purposes rather than donate all the extra to charity). \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	4)	}
\b Superlative Human Goodness (and badness). 
\b0 Some people are moral monsters, some people are saints. If our ethical theory does not account for this, then it is impoverished. Some people are not just decent but exceptionally admirable, heroically virtuous. Each of us has moral heroes, I believe, unless we are so deluded or so great that we believe ourselves morally superior to anyone we have yet come across.
\i  \
\ls1\ilvl0
\i0 \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}That firefighter is paragon of courage; Sam is a sage; Jose should be elected Sheriff because he 
\i always
\i0  does the right thing; Lindsay deserves every blessing she has. (I am carefully trying to break Godwin\'92s law.) John Maximovich is a saint; Mitchelle Blair (who allegedly murdered her children and stored them in a freezer) is a monster. \
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}We must account for how some exemplary good people become so good, so benevolent, just, kind, caring, compassionate, powerful, joyful, and wise \'97 and how some people become exemplary villains, examples of vice, debasement, wretchedness, and misery. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \

\b Are you just cherry-picking? 
\b0 \
Each of these needs alleged phenomena comment. Objections could be leveled against my choice of explananda to the effect that cherry-picking explananda is a way of fixing the race in favor of one or another future explanation. The worst academic sin I could commit early on would be to beg the question against a rival explanans merely by cherry-picking explananda. \
\

\b Examples from literature
\b0 \
To defend the first criterion, I have assembled a sort of sample from art, literature, reality television, anecdotal examples, history, and political discourse. The specimens of this sample are not, clearly, chosen at random. They were chosen with the criterion in mind. If my point were to show the features of a random sample, this sample would be a poor one. But that is not my point. Rather, I am to show *how easy* it is to gather examples of normative evaluations of various kinds deploying identical (English) terms for an apparent diversity of phenomena. \
\
}