{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### The charge of relativism ###\
\
Thus far we have said that virtues are acquired qualities that enable individuals to achieve the internal goods of practices and we have said that the self is a social (not empty) self. \
\
One worry that many readers have had is that MacIntyre\'92s virtue, thus far, is all too easily seen as a type of relativism: Is torture a practice? Is grand theft auto a practice that one can be excellent at? It certainly seems reasonable to think that some acquired qualities allow one to achieve the goods internal to car stealing. But MacIntyre denies being a relativist[@macintyre1984after xii-xiii in the 25th anniversary edition]. \
\
A fuller discussion of relativism I return to below, clarifying the charge and rebutting it. For now, the charge of relativism effectively motivates MacIntyre\'92s third stage. He admits that there might be evil practices. We can add that institutions or traditions can be evil. If so, then some \'93virtues\'94 that enable the achievement of goods and the health and continuance of institutions would be bad qualities. \
\
To avoid relativism, he must add a third layer or dimension to his account of virtue. So the account must do justice to the assumption that virtues are good for their possessor. \
\
### Human virtue ### \
\
The third level, then, is the broadest \'97 that of humanity. Individuals and societies or social groups do not share much (anything?) but what we are as biological and psychological creatures. MacIntyre admits that defining virtues in terms of practices necessitates questioning whether life as a whole can be virtuous \'97 the virtue of \'93integrity or constancy\'85 of singleness of purpose in a whole life.\'94[@macintyre1984after 203] Integrity is not our telos, but it is a necessary condition. So, from this broadest view, even practices and institutions can be judged by how well they accord with our overall purpose, our overall life, and our overall nature. Here we can see the closest attachment to Aristotle's original sense of 'virtue'.\
\
### Institutions ### \
\
Now, practices are distinct from (but related to) institutions or traditions. For example, a university is an institution defined by a set of practices in which professors and students engage. Thomism a tradition defined by a set of arguments playing out over time embedded in a social community.\
\
### Concentric Circles ### \
\
### Tradition and Rationality ###\
\
What is a tradition exactly?  \
\
>A tradition is an argument extended through time in which certain fundamental agreements are defined and redefined in terms of two kinds of conflicts: those with critics and enemies external to the tradition who reject all or at least key parts of those fundamental agreements, and those internal interpretative debates through which the meaning and rationale of the fundamental agreements come to be expressed and by whose progress a tradition is constituted.[@macintyre1988whose 12]\
\
Weinstein summarizes a tradition as \'93a living debate.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 64] As examples, MacIntyre offers the Aristotelian tradition, the Christian tradition, and the modern liberal tradition. Each has a \'93source text\'94, a community in fundamental agreement with the (orthodox reading of the) source text, arguments between interpreters concerning the \'93meaning and rationale\'94 of those fundamental agreements, and argument between those within the community and those outside. Each tradition has authorities or experts who safeguard and propagate the core beliefs on which there is agreement. \
\
Traditions are the social and intellectual contexts from which agreed-upon beliefs emerge. More importantly, traditions are the context in which *standards of rationality* itself emerges. There may be, and are, competing and incommensurable definitions of rationality itself. People within a tradition can disagree about a conclusion (should taxes be raised on the wealth?) but agree about the means of adjudication (let\'92s debate, hold a vote, run economic analyses, etc.). People across traditions can disagree about a conclusion (should women wear face coverings?) *and* disagree about the means of adjudication (let\'92s consult the Qu\'92ran, let\'92s debate, let\'92s let each woman decide for herself).\
\
Rationality for MacIntyre does not have any special, Enlightenment-friendly, technical meaning. Rationality is rather name for the whole process of judging truth and falsity *including* all the resources for judging truth and falsity. A particular understanding of rationality *includes* the procedural reasoning *and* "facts", the "objective facts", etc. about which we reason. \
\
Traditions can, by their own standards, fail. Inevitably rival traditions will judge each other as failures by alien standards; it is not interesting to note that *their* tradition fails by *my* standards, or vice versa. What is interesting is when *my* tradition fails *by my own* standards.\
\
Traditions, like scientific paradigms, as we noted briefly above, change through crisis. Traditions function throughout a generation and regenerate across generations. Most of the assumptions are \'93unarticulated pre-suppositions which are themselves never the objects of attention and enquiry.\'94[@macintyre1988dependent] This self-propagation proceeds until (internal) interpretive challenges or (external) criticism bring the swelling conflicts to a crisis point. After this, the members of the tradition either split and form a new sub-tradition or else consensually take one of a limited set of possible courses, including reformation, conservation, and growth. \
\
Traditions can grow and be systematically improved by any non-fatal crises brought up by internal provocateurs and external critics.[@weinstein2003macintyre 67] Anything that does not kill a tradition makes it stronger. But some crises are fatal. An \'93epistemological crisis\'94 is when \'93hitherto trusted methods of enquiry have become sterile\'85 conflicts over rival answers to key questions can no longer be settled rationally.\'94[@macintyre1988 361]\
\
So, we must imagine a three ring circle. At the center are practices; the middle ring is the narrative conception of human life, including a presumed telos; the outer ring is the tradition or culture. Weinstein summarizes:\
\
>These contain internal goods that drive the development of a story of justification which people use to develop a conception of a human *telos* that is itself the center and driving force behind a tradition, they form a *cultural* narrative. Children are born into this tradition, and they look toward these stories to justify their participation in the culture practices.[@weinstein2003macintyre 65]\
\
### How many traditions are there? ###\
\
In *Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry*[@macintyre1990three] MacIntyre calls modernity a tradition unto itself. Its source texts include Hume\'92s *Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding*, its authorities, arguments include the debate between empiricism and rationalism, arguments within philosophy of science over the proper scope and method of natural sciences, arguments between Christianity and atheism, etc. Its external critics include non-western (and non-colonial) cultures or non-Enlightenment cultures. \
\
The three main *types* of traditions we have already alluded to. Genealogy, encyclopedia, and tradition. Each of these are characterized by its attitude toward the past. \
>The encyclopaedists\'92 narrative reduces the past to a mere prologue of the rational present, while the genealogist struggles in the construction of his or her narrative against the past, included that of the past which is perceived as hidden within the alleged rationality of the present. The Thomists\'92 narrative, by contrast with both of these, treats the past neither as a mere prologue nor as something to be struggled against, but as that from which we have to learn if we are to identify and move towards our *telos* more adequately and that which we have to put to the question if we are to know which questions we ourselves should next formulas and attempt to answer, both theoretically and practically.[@macintyre1990three 79]\
\
Thomism is, I take it, only one tradition within the general type of Tradition. But the point is that enlightenment modernity is the \'93tradition\'94 of encyclopedias, the \'93traditionless-tradition.\'94 To put the picture in a caricature, each successive generation denies the validity of all previous generations. \
\
}