{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf110
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 3. **Incoherence of Tradition Objection.** A third related objection queries the concept of tradition through which, in part, MacIntyre defines virtue. This objections states that his tradition-constituted definition of rationality is self-contradictory. MacIntyre says on the one hand that, according to Tradition A, X is rational. According to Tradition B, X is not rational. They disagree and seem to genuinely disagree. A member of Tradition A can reasonably affirm that X cannot be both rational and irrational. Now, MacIntyre says that a member of Tradition B can discover some internal contradiction in Tradition B that makes her reconsider her tradition as aw hole. Perhaps she discovers that, according to Tradition B, Z is both rational and irrational. She is disconcerted by the contradiction. She decides to imaginatively entertain the possibility that Tradition A is more adequate and comes to see, over time, that Tradition A\'92s critique of Tradition B is compelling. The odd conclusion is this: affirming a contradiction is irrational for anyone in *any* tradition. Now, I endorse this conclusion; if someone affirms a contradiction, and they persist in it in spite of repeated attempts to explain to them the contradiction, I would find them not just mistaken but fundamentally mentally impaired \'97  irrational. But the point is not whether the law of non-contradiction is true and a reliable criterion of rationality. The point is that MacIntyre cannot say so without contradicting himself. \
\
Suppose first that Tradition A teaches that logical contradictions are irrational, while Tradition B teaches that logical contradictions can be rational. Then the member of Tradition B that affirms a contradiction (Z is both rational and irrational) will not, by her own standards, see a problem with her affirmation. A member of Tradition A will see the problem (by his own standards), but this is nothing surprising or new. The member of Tradition B has in principle no path out of her tradition, no motivation to see her tradition as mistaken, and hence no motivation to consider Tradition A. \
\
Suppose now that Tradition A teaches that logical contradictions are irrational and Tradition B teaches the same. Now, according to MacIntyre, they agree (at least on this point) about a standard of rationality. They disagree about whether Z is rational or not, but they agree that Z cannot be both irrational and rational at the same time in the same respect. Are Tradition A and B now part of the same tradition, since they agree about the law of non-contradiction? Or are they different traditions, since they disagree about the rationality of Z?}