{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\})}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00);}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\})}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00);}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid202\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid302\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid4}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Introduction\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
Is normativity natural? Are normative facts part of nature?  In this paper, I make a brief case for an affirmative answer. \
In the first section, I present a presumptive argument for natural normativity. Normative truths can be expressed in Aristotelian Categorical statements of the form all A\'92s \uc0\u966 . The existence of natural normative facts is best explanation of two other natural facts, both wrapped up in apparent teleology or end-directed phenomena. \
In the second section, I present a battery of seemingly devastating objections to the existence of objective natural norms. Not only does one risk mockery when flying in the face of current philosophical orthodoxy, but some substantive scientific and philosophical objections seem devastating. I argue that these arguments against natural normativity persuade with suggestion more than substance. By contrast, the evidence for natural normativity is fairly obvious, and the traditional explanations can be articulated with a high degree of sophistication, coherence. \
In the third section, since my idiosyncratic interest in natural norms arises partly from my research in metaethics, I conclude by discussing one possible implication of natural normativity within ethical and metaethical conversations. \
In this paper, I draw from eclectic sources, but most from Aristotle, Philippa Foot, and Thomas Nagel. I take my readings of Aristotle and Nagel to be fairly standard; my reading of Foot, on the other hand, extends a bit farther into metaphysical speculation than she herself (following Wittgenstein) is interested in going. I take my thesis to be 
\i naturalistic
\i0  in the broad sense: I am using philosophical and broadly scientific methods in an attempt to observe and explain natural phenomena, and bracketing divine revelation or the existence of supernatural beings. Furthermore, my thesis is naturalistic in that one important governing assumption of ethical naturalism is that humans are continuous with nature (Brown 2009). This naturalism I shall use to push back against one kind of objection. \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sa200
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Norms\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 First, what is a normative fact? A normative fact \'93is what corresponds to a true normative statement\'94 (Schaber). For reasons of space, I shall ask you to join me in simply assuming normative realism. So, value-statements, reason-statements, and ought-statements are refer to different norms. (I will use \'93norm\'94 and \'93normative fact\'94 interchangeably). \'93You ought not hit strangers with a skateboard\'94 is a moral statement, but obviously, not every ought is a moral ought (Thomson 2001). \'93You ought to drink some hot lemonade\'94 is a prudential norm (Thomson 2001). Drinking the hot lemonade is something you aspire to, rather than a description of how you are behaving. If you do not, your throat may remain sore. Importantly, not every norm uses 
\i the word \'91ought\'92
\i0 . For example, \'93Eyes are for seeing,\'94 is a description of their function, purpose, or the end-directed activity of that system. \'93Eyes are for seeing\'94 is a normative 
\i and 
\i0 descriptive statement \'97 that\'92s what eyes do 
\i and 
\i0 what they ought to do. Eyes that cannot see are defective qua eye. \'93Wolves hunt in packs\'94 is a normative and descriptive statement. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
The basic thesis\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 So, the basic structure of the argument is this: there are two phenomena, two natural facts, that are best explained by the reality of natural normativity. If those two natural facts are real, then norms are part of nature, nature is normative. \
Consider those two natural facts: the first is end-directed (teleonomic) behavior of natural entities (eyes see, trees grow, stomachs digest); the second is the essentially normative (teleological) cognitive and practical activity of natural humans. The best explanation of each of these facts, and of both together, is that nature is normative.  By nature is normative, we could also say that there are natural teleological laws, natural norms, final causes, natural ends, natural functions. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Aristotelian Categoricals 
\b0 \
\'93Wolves ought to hunt in packs\'94 is a statement Foot calls an Aristotelian Categorical (Foot 2002). An Aristotelian categorical is a statement of logical form neither universal nor particular. That is, to assert that all A\'92s \uc0\u966  is not to distribute \u966 -ing to all members of the category A, nor simply to assert that 
\i some 
\i0 A\'92s that we have observed were observed \uc0\u966 -ing. \
For example, \'93all reptiles lay eggs\'94 as universal categorical statement admits no exceptions.  The discovery of a new reptile, say, that gives live birth would not be the discovery of a 
\i defective
\i0  reptile, but a discovery of a new species of reptile. Or rather, it would mean that 
\i either
\i0  this newly discovered creature is not a reptile 
\i or 
\i0 that not all reptiles lay eggs. On the other hand, modestly confining oneself to a particular categorical statement like \'93some reptiles lay eggs\'94 would be radically unambitious science. Our sample size of reptiles that lay eggs is enormous; we are justified in making the inductive leap that 
\i all reptiles lay eggs. 
\i0 \
Aristotelian Categoricals, then, are neither simply universal nor simply particular categorical descriptions. They are normative/descriptive judgments. And they are also formed by observation and induction. For example, we observe that many As do indeed \uc0\u966 , and we infer that A 
\i is supposed to 
\i0 \uc0\u966 , A 
\i is for 
\i0 \uc0\u966 -ing.  Categorical are inductive generalizations with a normative character.  We have observed a sample of A\'92s \u966 -ing and we 
\i inductively infer 
\i0 that (perhaps) 
\i all 
\i0 A\'92s \uc0\u966 . On the basis of the generalization, the observation that a particular A does not \u966  does not refute a simply, universal predication but identifies a defect in that particular A. When we observe an exception to a categorical we do not ipso fact debunk our categorical nor are obliged to re-interpret our observation. When learn that all wolves (say) hunt in packs, and observe a wolf hunting alone, we do not debunk the principle that wolves hunt in packs. (Nor do we think that we have discovered a new species of canine that is morphologically and genetically identical to a wolf!) Rather, we have observed that not all wolves are doing what they are supposed to do, not all wolves perfectly exemplify their lifeform.\
\

\b A Presumptive Case for Natural Teleology\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 The presumptive case of natural teleology is this. \
\
	A. Argument for Normative Facts\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	1)	}If a normative statement is true, it corresponds to a normative fact. (Normative realism)\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0
\i \cf0 {\listtext	2)	}Eyes are for seeing
\i0  is a true normative statement. (From observation and induction). \
{\listtext	3)	}Therefore, 
\i eyes are for seeing
\i0  corresponds to a normative fact. (From 1-2)\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
	B. Argument for Natural Normative Facts. \
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	1)	}Further, if a normative statement is true about natural entities, then there are natural normative facts. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural
\ls2\ilvl0
\i \cf0 {\listtext	
\i0 2)
\i 	}Eyes are for seeing
\i0  is a true normative statement about a natural entity. \
{\listtext	3)	}Therefore, there are natural normative facts. \
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural
\cf0 Argument (A) assumes normative realism for premise 1.  We learn premise 2 from observation and induction: an Aristotelian Categorical descriptive/normative statement: 
\i Eyes are for seeing
\i0  (stomachs are supposed to digest, wolves hunt in packs, humans ought to think rationally, or what have you). (I) delivers conclusion (3), that there are normative facts. Then, argument (B) provides a simple variation on (A). True normative statements about natural entities correspond to real natural facts. Such normative facts are 
\i natural 
\i0 and not merely human, psychological, or projected. And (2) is, I take it, obviously normative and about a natural entity (not something man-made). So (B) delivers our thesis, that there are natural normative facts. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Objections
\b0 : 
\b It seems that nature is not normative
\b0 \
Let\'92s consider just a few of the powerful objections to this line of thinking. 
\b \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 {\listtext	1.	}The first objection is that it is false that 
\i eyes are for seeing. 
\i0 Some will say, \'93Eyes that do not see died out; eyes that see were preserved naturally.\'94 \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\pardirnatural
\ls3\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}As far as I can tell, evolutionary backstories about what eyes are and what eyes do has nothing to do with whether they have a real, end-directed function. There is disagreement about whether explanations 
\i undermines 
\i0 or 
\i underwrites 
\i0 teleological explanations (Brown 2009). All that I need for my argument to work is that 
\i possibly 
\i0 evolutionary backstories underwrite natural teleology. The only reason to assume that natural selection is undirected by natural teleology is dogma. If so, call me a heretic. \
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}But is it really possible to doubt that eyes are for seeing? That eyes see is an empirical observation. That eyes 
\i ought 
\i0 to see, that eyes that cannot see are defective, is, I insist, equally empirical. It is just as empirical and no more theory-laden than other scientific observations like \'93all reptiles lay eggs.\'94 \
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}I save one more response to this objection in the last objection.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	2.	}A second objection is to cling to an image. On one very powerful picture of the world, nature is a realm of pure descriptive facts. Nature is \'93bald\'94, \'93disenchanted,\'94 and purely physical (McDowell 1996). Nature is an interlocking system of relations, spatial, temporal, and causal. Nature is \'93\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
the world of quantity, as against the world of quality; of objects as against consciousness\'85 of that which knows no values as against that which both has and perceives value; of efficient causes (or, in some modern systems, of no causality at all) as against final causes.\'94 (Lewis 1943). \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Some call this the Laplacian picture (Plantinga 2011). On the Laplacian picture, norms are final causes, 
\i teloi, 
\i0 ways, and hence must be 
\i merely 
\i0 psychological. The Laplacian picture is the scientific picture of nature. So the assertion of norms is unscientific.  \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\pardirnatural
\ls3\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}By all means, let us be scientific. I have an unwavering pro-attitude toward whatever earns the honorific title of science. If teleological laws are not discovered by scientific methods, then normative facts remain mere hypotheses or pragmatic assumptions or unshakable illusions. But the fact that
\i  eyes really are for seeing
\i0  disproves the Laplacian picture of science. Natural normativity is scientific, and its denial is unscientific. It is empirical, and its denial is dogmatic.  \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	3.	}A third objection. The existence of natural teleology depends heavily on inferences to the best explanation. But \'93best\'94 explanation depends in part on background beliefs. If one of our background beliefs is that we believe on good inductive evidence from scientific methods, that there are no natural norms, then appeal to normative facts to explain apparent normative truths like \'93eyes are for seeing\'94 is blocked. So, on best scientific methods, we must deny the appearances: either normative realism is false, or normative natural facts are merely descriptive with the illusion of normativity. \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\pardirnatural
\ls3\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}By \'93scientific methods\'94  we mean one of two things: Firstly, when some people say \'93facts discovered by scientific methods\'94 they do not mean a method at all but a doctrine, in this case, that normativity is not natural. But we can dismiss the dogma since I have given a case that, all things being equal, normative truths (described by Aristotelian Categoricals) are indeed apparently real and are indeed explained by inference to normative facts.  Or, secondly, some people mean by \'93scientific methods\'94 those  that sometimes use the inference to the best explanation.  Scientists 
\i do 
\i0 use inference to the best explanation (abduction, hypotheses, explanation). It is a tool in the scientific tool belt. It is, in fact, ineliminable part of the scientific method. \
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}And that is the kind of inference we used. The explanation of teleological phenomena (by teleological laws) may be 
\i wrong 
\i0 but it is not in the wrong ball park. It may be 
\i unscientific 
\i0 in the sense that any datum, theorem, proposition, law, or statement that turns out to be false is \'97 ipso facto \'97 unscientific. But it is not unscientific by being simply non-scientific, by being different from the scientific enterprise the way that street lights, rhetorical questions, and Cinderella movies are non-scientific. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	4.	}This is not strictly an objection: but someone might be thinking that the doctrine of natural norms is unpopular, and therefore probably false. If it were true, wouldn\'92t more scientists believe it? More philosophers of science? More philosophers? More people? My only response to this is that philosophical fashions come and go, and perhaps this particular fashion of denying teleology rests on a mistake; regardless, we can and should consider the argument on its own terms. I have argued that observing natural norms is an empirical business; who knows but that we may see natural normativity becomes the new, justified, scientific consensus? \
{\listtext	5.	}A fourth, very different objection. Suppose we grant that 
\i humans are supposed to think rationally 
\i0 is a norm, and a norm about human nature. We are, as a species, capable of advanced cognition and practice. (Those of us who think irrationally and act irrationally are, when we do so, defective.) So why not just explain the appearance of natural norms, of final causes, of purposes, of natural ends, by a combination natural selection and human projection? We are projecting our insides onto nature\'92s insides. When really, nature has no \'93inside,\'94 no subjectivity, no consciousness. \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\pardirnatural
\ls3\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}Strangely enough, such an explanation divorces humanity from nature. It makes humans mysterious, radically discontinuous, opaque, anomalous, and queer. Since I am here assuming that humans are continuous with nature, I reject an account of teleology that makes it natural only to humans but unnatural to the cosmos as a whole. Furthermore, I have studiously avoided using too many uncontroversial examples of human normativity, preferring the more controversial (and hence more interesting) examples of non-human normative facts. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	6.	}A fifth, and also very different objection. Stephen Brown objects that arguments from an observation that A \uc0\u966 \'92s to the conclusion that A 
\i ought to 
\i0 \uc0\u966  prove too much, since it can be applied not only to non-humans but to non-living things. For example, we could \'93prove\'94 that our hydrogen star is 
\i for 
\i0 radiating energy to the earth; the sun engenders life so therefore it is 
\i supposed to 
\i0 engender life. But this seems absurd: tthe sun does not have a purpose, a natural normativity. This is an objection about scope: if there are norms in terrestrial nature, do they extend to the whole cosmos? My presumptive case argues are really real and really natural but may be taken to prove only that norms exist for organic natural entities.\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\pardirnatural
\ls4\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}On the one hand, I am perfectly content to rest my case. If I have persuaded you of a more modest conclusions, that normative laws obtain only in humans; or they obtain only in living organisms, or even more ambitiously, that they obtain only in organic systems (both organisms and their organs). \
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}On the other hand, Thomas Nagel (2012) makes the case in 
\i Mind and Cosmos 
\i0 that teleological (and hence normative) laws are natural to the cosmos as a whole, including inorganic matter. I think there are two good reasons to be maximally ambitious about natural normativity. They are both reductios: suppose that there are natural normative facts about 
\i only 
\i0 organic entities, not non-living entities like the soil and the sun. Then we must affirm that when life appeared on earth, a 
\i new kind of case 
\i0 appeared as well: final causes. A new natural fact that was never there before, normative natural facts appear. For 13 billion years prior, there was only chance and efficient/material causes. Suddenly, and accidentally, the universe produced not only a new entity but a new kind of fact: normative facts. This sounds to me absurd, though if it does not sound so to you, I\'92m not sure how to persuade you otherwise. It makes more sense, I think, to suppose that natural normativity was there from the Big Bang forward. A second reductio: In the first objection, we considered that natural selection undermines the appearance of teleology. The problem is that natural selection does not apply to inorganic entities and systems like the soil, the sun, and the stars. There is no interstellar process analogous to genetic drift and the extinction of maladaptive traits. This also sounds to me absurd. The alternative, then, is more likely true: natural norms just are features of all of nature. Teleological normative laws are another brute kind of natural laws. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Conclusion about Metaethics: Norms unite human nature and non-human nature
\b0 \
What is particularly exciting to me about natural normativity, if it is true, is its implication for ethics. I want to suggest, in closing, that the non-human stuff of the cosmos (quasars, deer, comets) and the human stuff of the cosmos (you and me) share a common structure, and that this underwrites many ethical claims. \
Descriptive natural laws describe formal relational structures at any given moment, a set of stable relations between natural entities; normative natural laws describe relational structures across time; a set of consistent end-directed relations between natural-things-as-they-are and natural things-as-they-ought-to-become. So the explanation for human end-directed behavior and non-human end-directed processes is the same: natural norms. \
Julia Annas puts it this way:  \'93What is so helpful for ethics from this kind of biological naturalism is that we find that the normativity of our ethical discourse is not something which emerges mysteriously with humans and can only be projected back, in an anthropomorphic way, onto trees and their roots. Rather, we find normativity in the realm of living things, plants and animals, already\'85\'94 (Annas 1996). Natural normativity underwrites the belief that non-human nature and human nature share a common structure. This is just what ethical naturalism predicts. \
That structure is both formal and final, both descriptive and normative.  And discovering that structure is the joint task of philosophy (metaphysics) and science (the philosophy of nature), since experimental and theoretical methods are both fruitful. This is just what naturalism predicts. \
Ethical living is when we 
\i aim
\i0  to become what we 
\i ought to become
\i0 . Honesty, promise-keeping, rationality, prudence, moderation, perseverance, can be plausibly presented as traits that enable us to become what we are already are and what we ought to be.\
\
}