{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Analytical Precis of Dissertation\
\
\
\
# Analytical Precis of (Dissertation Title) #\
\
## Introduction ##\
1. The thesis of this dissertation is... \
2. My methodology is fundamentally MacIntyrean. \
3. Virtue ethics is on the rise; I want to contribute to this revival. \
4. Some themes are settled but many theses are still up for grabs. \
5. Some big recurring questions pertain to the definition of virtue, and its relation to \uc0\u966 \u961 \u959 \u957 \u949 \u963 \u953 \u962  or practical wisdom (practical rationality, prudence, etc.)\
6. Some secondary questions pertain to human nature, the naturalistic fallacy, worries about the psychological reality of virtues, the distinction between intellectual and moral (or theoretical/practical) virtues, and the objectivity or "bindingness" of morality. \
6. This dissertation explores five virtue ethicists and their take on these main themes, as well as some secondary ones. \
5. This thesis explores "neo-Aristotelian" virtue ethicists, rather than many of the new, interesting, outlier brands. \
7. The neo-Aristotelians are interesting to me.  \
8. The neo-Aristotelians are united in denying that metaethics and ethics can ultimately be divorced and treated independently. \
8. I'll treat each one on his or her own terms, but try to note harmony and discuss dissonance as they emerge. \
9. For example, one common theme that will arise each is teleology, that is, end-directed or seemingly end-directed behavior of agents, organs, animals, systems, or the cosmos as a whole. So there is recurring discussion of "function", or telos, or purpose, or end, as it relates to form, or structure, or configuration. \
10. Another theme relating to practical reason is one of the great themes of western philosophy: the relation or distinction between rationality and practical rationality, mind and will, reason and choice, etc. \
8. The dissertation has six main chapters: one for each thinker and a conclusion. \
\
## Chapter 1: MacIntyre  ##\
1. MacIntyre is influential. \
2. MacIntyre treats ethical inquiry as a species of rational inquiry. \
3. MacIntyre is a severe critic of modernity (labelled Enlightenment, liberalism, etc.). \
4. Enlightenment modernity is bankrupt not only morally, but politically and socially as well; but especially our ethics.\
5. The primary failure of the Enlightenment was the excisement of teleology from reality, human nature, human life, and human practice. \
3. Rationality is constituted by traditions (and constitutes them). \
4. Hence, practical rationality is constituted by a tradition.\
5. Traditions are socially embedded arguments over time, rooted in source text, with authorities, and argumenst inside and outside the tradition.\
5. What is good to do, what is a good life, are indexed to traditions, the notion of human life, and practices.\
6. Practices are complex social activities with common goals, common standards, and the possibility of excellence in achieving those goals within those standards. \
7. Life is a continuous practice or serious of practices in pursuit of a socially-defined good. \
8. Virtues enable success in practices, and enable a flourishing life for persons and communities, and sustain traditions. \
9. Virtue has three layers or dimensions: practices, social institutions, and human life as a whole (within that tradition). \
10. The telos of life is (minimally) to be free to pursue one's telos; it is (maximally) to discover more adequately one's telos. \
11. Virtues enable the achievement of telos, to *know how to live*.\
10. Humans are by nature practical reasoners. \
11. Humans are vulnerable and need virtues of dependence as well as "greatness" or magnanimity. \
12. Virtuous communities successful educate their young to become independent practical reasoners who *know* what to do, know what is good, and pursue it, further defining and clarifying what is good. \
13. Some object that MacIntyre vascillates on his definition of virtue.\
14. But the practice-relative virtues are relative to traditions and can be judged as a whole.\
13. Some object that MacIntyre is a relativist -- there is no "tradition" to ethics and morality.\
14. But he argues that traditions can be tested against one another through philosophical imagination; and my own tradition can be tested by my own standards. \
14. Some object that MacIntyre is not relativistic enough -- there is simply no "rationality" to ethics and morality. \
15. MacIntyre argues that reason *begins* in time, place, social context, language, but is not ultimately a slave to these limits; it can transcend them to achieve something like the Enlightenment ideal of universal reason. Traditions can get along, and emotivism, nihilism, are disastrous for human life. \
16. Some (especially the Encyclopediasts) object that ethics can get on well enough without teleology. \
17. The true abandonment of natural and social teleology leads to moral nihilism; the rules without any point. \
18. Most moral theorists (and biologists, psychologists, etc.) do not really abandon teleology except in name. \
19. MacIntyre's critiques are wide-ranging and cut deep; if they are true, much needs to change about university education and the way ethics and morality are studied and taught and practiced. \
20. Even those who disagree are invited to engage in philosophical imagination to examine his rival tradition and examine the flaws and inconsistencies of their own tradition. \
\
## Chapter 2: Foot ##\
1. Philippa Foot is influential. \
2. Foot treats morality as a species of practical reason. \
3. Foot is a severe critic of G. E. Moore's conception that good can be a one place predicate; it is always *good for*. \
3. Virtues enable human beings to "get along well"; in this she agrees with Peter Geach. \
4. Virtues for humans are like stings for bees, swiftness for deer, solidarity for wolves; there is a fundamental parity between natural goodness in nonhumans and humans. \
4. Immorality can be answered.\
5. Virtues benefit their possessor by definition; but they can cause harm and suffering.\
6. Happiness is deep satisfaction.\
7. Unhappiness is in some way compatible with virtue. \
8. Some object that Foot is not a "naturalist."\
9. This is to misunderstand Foot and to beg the question as to what nature is. \
10. Some object that Foot is unclear across three levels: logic, language, and morality. \
11. This is somewhat true but drawing a clear distinction between the three need not suggest a sharp *division* between the three. \
12. Some object that Foot is not clear (James Lenman, for example). \
13. This is not true; she is clear enough to expose the readers' modern prejudices. \
\
\
\
## Chapter 3: McDowell ##\
1. John McDowell is influential. \
\
## Chapter 4: Adams ##\
\
## Chapter 5: Conclusion ##\
\
\
\
}