{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## Metaethics and Ethics  \
\
### Moore and More Ethics ###\
\
Metaethics in its modern form began with G. E. Moore\'92s 
\i *Principia Ethica*. 
\i0 Of course, the questions that concern modern metaethicists were posed and discussed by prior thinkers. However, the *Principia* gave a distinctive form to these questions and suggested a distinctive range of possible answers. We shall see how Philippa Foot and others dispute the validity of that form and that range. For now, it is better to summarize a bit of Moore\'92s thinking and the legacy his thinking created. \
\
Moore argued that all previous ethical philosophers had failed to resolve their disputes for a failure to define their terms. The question of what the word \'91good\'92 *means* (and, possibly the same question, what \'91good\'92 *refers to*) is distinct from the question *which things are good?* The first question is a conceptual question that aims to define a category. The second question is a substantive or existential question that aims to bring other concepts within that category. \
\
Moore argued (or according to some critics, *assumed*) that \'91goodness\'92 was indefinable. That is, the good could not be defined in terms of any other property. It is false that \'91goodness is pleasure\'92  or \'91goodness is whatever is most real\'92. That we pursue pleasure is a psychological claim, not an ethical one; that we judge something to be real is a metaphysical claim, not an ethical one. \
\
#### G.E. Moore, The Naturalistic Fallacy ####\
\
If the good is indefinable, then any attempt to define it is going to fail. Any attempt to reduce the concept to a concept of lesser intension, or to translate it it as a concept, commits the \'93naturalistic fallacy.\'94 Moore is clear that the naturalistic fallacy isn\'92t *just* the error of defining the good as a natural property (such as the pleasant) but also the error of defining the good as a metaphysical or supernatural property (such as the Really Really, or the Divinely-Ordained). \
\
#### Ethics #### \
\
Moore\'92s book comes down from its metaethical heavens back to the normative earth. He argues that whatever is good intrinsically can be known by direct moral perception. Whatever is good instrumentally can be known a posteriori through probabilistic reasoning about causal links between actions and their effects. Whatever necessarily brings about (or tends to bring about) intrinsically good states of affairs is instrumentally good. \
\
Intrinsic goods, for Moore, are three: aesthetic pleasure, friendship, and knowledge.\
\
#### The Legacy ####\
\
Moore set off a firestorm of debate on this issues. By the account of most of my five key authors, Moore\'92s legacy is largely a tangent from the deeper philosophical questions within ethics. \
\
## Neo-Aristotelian Virtue Ethics? ##\
\
I would like to explore one further reason for studying just these four virtue ethicists together. Stating this reason requires taking a bit of a detour. I think the detour will address (if not diffuse) a potential worry about the relation between normative ethics and metaethics. \
\
In recognition of their approach to philosophical ethics, most of these virtue ethicists are also classified as "neo-Aristotelians" with respect to metaethics. There are two important metaphilosophical confusions lurking behind these innocuous distinctions. \
\
To begin to see the confusions, consider the way James Lenman summarizes neo-Aristotelianism as a version of "moral naturalism":\
\
>One important school of thought ... [is] work is inspired by that of Aristotle. This view has its roots in the writings of G. E. M. Anscombe, P. T. Geach and the early Philippa Foot among others. Its contemporary representatives include the later Foot, Rosalind Hursthouse, Martha Nussbaum and Judith Jarvis Thomson. As this list makes clear, this is very much the official metaethical theory of the main current in contemporary virtue ethics. [@sepmoralnaturalism. Lenman acknowledges that Thomson might need to be subtracted from this list and that John McDowell might need to be added.]\
\
Lenman does not quite know what to do with neo-Aristotelian naturalism. The first confusing fact is the close tie between neo-Aristotelian naturalism and virtue theory.  Lenman seems bemused when he says that neo-Aristotelianism "the official metaethical theory of the main current in contemporary virtue ethics."  For when Foot, Hursthouse, McDowell are classified as virtue ethicists (a normative theory) *and* neo-Aristotelians (a metaethical theory), we might object.  Aren't these two different projects? One legacy of G.E. Moore's *Principia Ethica* has been the tendency to sharply distinguish primary ethical questions (about what things are good) from metaethical questions (about what 'good' as an evaluative predicate *means*). \
\
The second is an uncertainty with respect to who actually deserves the title of "naturalists". Lenman is not sure who counts, pointing out in a footnote that Thomson probably shouldn't be on this list and that John McDowell probably should. He says "McDowell is certainly pervasively inspired by Aristotle and he describes himself as a naturalist. See especially his 1995. But I suspect many philosophers would find his use of the term  'naturalist' here somewhat Pickwickian."[@sepmoralnaturalism]  The confusion arises because Lenman and others[@rehg2003conceptual; @hacker2009natural; @hacker2009human] are not sure that neo-Aristotelian "naturalism" is "really *naturalism*" at all. \
\
Both of these confusions reflect deep fault lines in contemporary philosophical ethics. In brief, the fault line separates two contrary ways of understanding what *nature* is. Put differently, the fault line separates two ways of understanding the fact/value dichotomy.[@putnam2002collapse] \
\
Aristotle and the broad Aristotelian tradition deny that the fact-value dichotomy is absolute. They conceive of *nature* as including everything that *is and ought to be.* Briefly, for Moore nature as including everything that *is* but not what ought to be -- all facts, no values. Moore and those influenced by him, both naturalists and non-naturalists, have agreed with the underlying assumption that "nature" is purely descriptive. But what if this assumption is mistaken? Surely we cannot let a deeply-held assumption stand without scrutiny. For Aristotle, nature is some facts, some values. So norms and prescriptions can be just as natural as facts and descriptions. If normativity (*what ought to be*) is natural too, then it might be possible that *human nature* grounds ethical facts. And this is just what virtue ethics says. \
\
The two questions above (about whether neo-Aristotelians are truly "naturalists" and the close tie between neo-Aristotelian metaethics and normative virtue ethics) have the same answer: Aristotle's ethics and his metaphysics (of biology and nature) cannot be easily extricated from each other. The same goes for neo-Aristotelians. There is a tight fit -- perhaps an inextricable tie -- between Aristotelian virtue theory and the metaethical view labeled neo-Aristotelian naturalism. And neo-Aristotelian naturalists argue that nature is or can be normative. Talking as if the fact-value dichotomy is *not* ultimate makes the other sort of naturalist squirm.\
\
Now, non-Aristotelians might just double down and insist that metaethical theory is utterly procedural and not substantive -- they might insist that it is utterly neutral with respect to normative ethical theories. Certainly this is the most widespread belief. \
\
Nevertheless, two responses are possible: first, we might seriously doubt this alleged neutrality. For example, we might notice the conspicuous connection between supposedly "neutral" metaethics and first-order consequentialism: G.E. Moore, J.L. Mackie, Frank Jackson, Richard Boyd, Peter Railton, Simon Blackburn, and Alan Gibbard all endorse consequentialism. (We might even echo Lenman and call moral naturalism the "official theory of a main current in contemporary consequentialism.") \
\
Secondly, even if a procedural, non-substantive approach to metaethics can be made neutral with respect to normative ethics, it is still admirably ambitious to construct a theory that pays attention to both. Darwall agrees. His (2003) essay summarizes the history of analytic ethics since Moore, and persuasively argues "that although metaethics and normative ethics are properly focused on different issues, they need to be brought into dynamic relation with one another in order to produce a systematic and defensible philosophical ethics. This mutual dependence is owing to the fact that issues of normativity are at the center of the concerns of both metaethics and normative ethics."[@darwall2003should] I might add that issues of normativity *and nature* are at the center of concerns about both. \
\
These are deep waters. Suffice it to say, for now, that I think Darwall is right here: Moore's legacy is not the last word on the relation between the semantic and metaphysical foundations of moral terms and concepts and the substantive normative questions. And these four tend to agree. Foot and MacIntyre, for instance, begin their books by criticizing Moore for his erroneous starting points. They may all be wrong, but they are on a page together. \
\
 And that is one of the major reasons for selecting these four for dissertation-length study. They are sure to provide excellent fodder for study in their own right, and also provide a gateway into further research and writing on some of these deeper relations between disenchanted nature and "re-enchanted" nature, between and virtue, between humanity and human excellence.}