{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 8. Another might object that generics about human nature or the human life-form is not ethically relevant, since one is able, by virtue of rationality, to transcend one's nature. The practical point of view is not "scientific", even if it is broadly "naturalistic."\
9. The initial response to this objection is that some such properties are nt while some are not, and that it takes practical wisdom itself to recognize which ones are which. The scientific point of view is not the point of view *from within* the space of law but *about* the space of law *from within* the space of reasons. \
9. McDowell urges this point against "Thompsonian" and Footian naturalism. He thematizes the concept of 'nature' itself. \
10. For McDowell, nature consists of Lockean primary qualities, which are response-independent as well as dispositional properties which are response-dependent. "Values" are the latter sort. There is no such thing as "to-be-pursuedness" existing as a Lockean primary quality in first nature. Nevertheless, values are not merely subjective fantasy. They are intersubjective, grounded in a form of life, grounded in our rationality itself. \
11. McDowell's view here is comprehensible in light of his broader project of anti-metaphysics, therapeutic philosophy, constructivism, and so on. \
12. The problems with McDowell's view are these: (1) McDowell's concept of nature is incoherent. It is both restricted and unrestricted. My view is superior in explicitly adopting an unrestricted conception and paying the conceptual price. (2) McDowell's concept of science is too crassly restrictive; although he disputes the "philistene scientism" of his opponents, he seems to me to endorse just enough philistene scientism to deserve his own criticism. He is a scietific realist on one page and anti-realist on another. And (3) there do seem to be primary qualities of nature such as "danger" and "safe" that are relational and actionable like moral qualities such as good and bad. McDowell's own example admits this but he shies away from the obvious conclusion.\
13. It is *not* a problem that McDowell's view is a brand of idealism -- not a problem along naturalistic lines, since idealism can be naturalism, as Fink explains. }