{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
7. Life is a continuous practice or serious of practices in pursuit of a socially-defined good. \
8. Virtues enable success in practices, and enable a flourishing life for persons and communities, and sustain traditions. \
9. Virtue has three layers or dimensions: practices, social institutions, and human life as a whole (within that tradition). \
10. The telos of life is (minimally) to be free to pursue one's telos; it is (maximally) to discover more adequately one's telos. \
11. Virtues enable the achievement of telos, to *know how to live*.\
10. Humans are by nature practical reasoners. \
11. Humans are vulnerable and need virtues of dependence as well as "greatness" or magnanimity. \
12. Virtuous communities successful educate their young to become independent practical reasoners who *know* what to do, know what is good, and pursue it, further defining and clarifying what is good. \
13. Some object that MacIntyre vascillates on his definition of virtue.\
14. But the practice-relative virtues are relative to traditions and can be judged as a whole.\
13. Some object that MacIntyre is a relativist -- there is no "tradition" to ethics and morality.\
14. But he argues that traditions can be tested against one another through philosophical imagination; and my own tradition can be tested by my own standards. \
14. Some object that MacIntyre is not relativistic enough -- there is simply no "rationality" to ethics and morality. \
15. MacIntyre argues that reason *begins* in time, place, social context, language, but is not ultimately a slave to these limits; it can transcend them to achieve something like the Enlightenment ideal of universal reason. Traditions can get along, and emotivism, nihilism, are disastrous for human life. \
16. Some (especially the Encyclopediasts) object that ethics can get on well enough without teleology. \
17. The true abandonment of natural and social teleology leads to moral nihilism; the rules without any point. \
18. Most moral theorists (and biologists, psychologists, etc.) do not really abandon teleology except in name. \
19. MacIntyre's critiques are wide-ranging and cut deep; if they are true, much needs to change about university education and the way ethics and morality are studied and taught and practiced. \
20. Even those who disagree are invited to engage in philosophical imagination to examine his rival tradition and examine the flaws and inconsistencies of their own tradition. \
}