{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ### Summary\
\
Let's sum up what we've said so far and see how it applies to virtue. The argument of the previous chapter showed how the is-ought gap is not fatal for some forms of neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism. For on this sort of ethical naturalism, all generics can be used as premises in arguments with normative conclusions. Some true generics are about humans (there are some human natural norms). Therefore, some true generics about humans can be used as premises in arguments with normative conclusions. \
\
As we said above: \
\
(1) All natural organisms exhibit formal and functional (i.e., teleological) facts which are expressible in generics. \
(2) Human beings are natural organisms.\
(3) Human beings exhibit formal and teleological facts which are expressible in generics. \
\
Now, the true generic I have been trying to substantiate is (4) that human beings are practical, rational animals. This generic is of momentous importance. Each word "animal", "practical," and "rational" entails a cluster of concepts. To be an animal is to be alive, to be a natural organism, and so on. As Mautner continues: "Life is a process whose outcome is the self-reproduction of complex molecular patterns\'92. Importantly, Life is then a process that requires a constant flow of information, matter and energy."[@mautner2009life 435] That process of life on earth has been  a continuous one, throughout time, since the first origins of life on the planet. \
\
Furthermore, we are not just "living beings" but *animals.* We come to be in similar ways as other mammals, have similar needs for oxygen, food, society, warmth, exercise, and sleep. And to be a common life form entails that each of us begins life in roughly the same way, need the same range of nutrients to grow and survive, and deserve the same respect. \
\
Finally,  something changes when we examine human beings compared to all other animals or all other natural kinds.[@hawley2011natural] We are not just animals but practical rational animals. This entails the emergence of a new set of capacities: abstract thought, speech, sociality, rational practice, and creativity. So, we can predict that just as the scientist  evaluates members of a species by how well or badly it exemplifies its particular life form, human beings are evaluable by how well or badly they exemplify their particular  life form. We continue to evaluate humans on the basis of their species, but we evaluate not just their health and normal developmental stages, and their maturity, but their *actions*. Michael Thompson summarizes: \
\
>... we may view this line of thought as beginning with the idea... that will and practical reason are on the face of it just two more faculties or powers a living being may bear, on a level with the powers of sight and hearing an memory. The second crucial thought is that an individual instance of any of the latter powers \'97 sight, hearing, memory \'97 is intuitively to be judged as defective or sound, good or bad, well-working or ill-working, by reference to its bearer's life-form or kind or species.[@thompson2008life 29]\
\
The good-of-a-kind for our species is not *only* about practical reasoning, but also about animality. For example, starving to death, or being born without limbs, or being unable to reproduce is a bad-of-a-kind for creatures like us (not a moral bad, of course, but a real misfortune). So an exemplary member of our species would have to exemplify a whole range of good properties. Hursthouse captures up the good specimen of a practical rational animal, in this way:\
\
>So, summing up, a good social animal (of one of the more sophisticated species) is one that is well fitted or endowed with respect to (i) its parts, (ii) its operations, (iii) its actions, and (iv) its desires and emotions; whether it is thus well fitted or endowed is determined by whether these four aspects well serve (1) its individual survival, (2) the continuance of its species, (3) its characteristic freedom from pain and characteristic enjoyment, and (4) the good functioning of its social group--in the ways characteristic of the species.[@hursthouse1998virtue 202]\
\
This is pretty well comprehensive. The only points I would add have to do with adding specification to the "good functioning" or flourishing of individuals and social groups, which I will do in a later chapter. \
\
Before considering the application of my argument to ethics, I would like to stop and address a few objections. }