# Humans and Natural Goodness

*"Biology cannot, or at least in practice does not, eliminate functions and purposes."*


The notion that natural, descriptive facts can serve as premises in arguments with normative conclusions is central to ethical naturalism. Rosalind Hursthouse argues that although ethical evaluations of human beings are "disanalogous to non-ethical ones in various ways, both depend upon our identifying what is characteristic of the species in question."[@hursthouse1998virtue chapter 10, abstract.] If normative evaluations can be grounded in factual descriptions of the identity and characteristics of a species, then this would mean descriptive facts can license normative judgments. "Is" statements can lead to "ought" statements. But is this right? 

The major problem I shall address has various names, but the name I prefer is "the is-ought gap".^[G. E. Moore had a different name for this problem, but his name would just muddy the waters. If absolutely necessary, I shall only call Moore's version "The Fallacy That Shall Not Be Named."] While the other challenges are formidable, the is-ought gap is the central challenge of this chapter. 

The solution I shall defend is natural normativity in the form of natural teleological facts. But let's understand the problem in a bit more detail. 

Simply put, the is-ought gap is the intuitive notion that one cannot learn anything about *what ought to be* simply by examining *what is*.[^1] Suppose your friend Jim will be attending his first Oscar ceremony, but doesn't know what to wear. Suppose we observe that *most male celebrities wear black ties to the Oscars.* It simply does not follow from the premise that most men in fact wear black ties that *Jim ought to wear a black tie to the Oscars*. At least, it does not follow unless we supply an additional, brutely normative premise such as that *He ought to wear whatever most people wear*. And *that* premise is not one we learned from observation. More broadly, one cannot deduce from anthropological facts (say, that all humans in all cultures wear some type of clothing) any normative conclusions (that humans *ought* to wear clothing. We cannot settle a controversy among nudists by citing statistical generalities.)

[1]: [Thus, Hume: "In every system of morality, which I have hitherto met with, I have always remarked, that the author proceeds for some time in the ordinary ways of reasoning, and establishes the being of a God, or makes observations concerning human affairs; when all of a sudden I am surprised to find, that instead of the usual copulations of propositions, is, and is not, I meet with no proposition that is not connected with an ought, or an ought not. This change is imperceptible; but is however, of the last consequence." (*A Treatise of Human Nature* book III, part I, section I).] 

The is-ought gap poses a serious challenge to the neo-Aristotelian strategy Hursthouse and others are pursuing. For even supposing we gathered a whole collection of reliable scientific truths about humans -- from anthropology, psychology, sociology, and also biology, chemstry, physics -- we would not be a wit closer to establishing any ethical truths. A detailed and scientific description of human nature could hope to supply a "descriptive ethics" that narrates what such-and-such a culture approves of or finds worthwhile compared to what they find worthless and reprehensible. At its best, a descriptive ethics might identify universal moral appropbations and disapprobations. For example, while habits and attitudes toward drinking alcohol vary dramatically from culture to culture, there seems to be a universal (cross-cultural) disapprobation for continual drunkenness, even among cultures (like the Bolivian Camba) that drink drink regularly and drink heavily.^["It is important to realize that drinking problems are virtually unknown in most of the world's cultures, including many where drinking is commonplace and occasional drunkenness is accepted." @heath1982sociocultural] Such findings might be interesting, but the is-ought gap reminds us that they are a far cry from *ethical* insights.

Nevertheless, Hursthouse, Philippa Foot, John McDowell, MacIntyre, and Stephen Brown aim to overcome (or rather to pre-emptively undercut) the is-ought gap by the identification of some formal or teleological concept that can license normative judgments -- whether that is Hursthouse's "characteristic", or a "life-form"^[@thompson2008life 57] or "form of life"[@@mcdowell1979virtue 339], or "human nature", or a human telos. Rather than "overcoming" the gap (which assumes the gap Is still in place), these theorists' strategy is to uncover a kind of formal or teleological fact that defies the strict separation between 'is' and 'ought.' As Stephen Brown puts it, "Human beings are a species of social animal for which there is a characteristic way of life. An individual human being may be evaluated as good or bad according to how well that individual realizes the human way of life."[@brown2008virtue 1] The concept of a "human way of life", in Brown's argument, is unapologetically both descriptive and normative, both formal and teleological.

For the sake of simplicity, let us call the kind of formal facts such neo-Aristotelians use as a ground for their ethical theory 'natural normativity.' The concept of 'natural normativity' is indeterminate, which means I run the risk of unclarity; that indeterminacy is necessary for us to discuss these issues without begging the question in favor of the view that all norms are unnatural and all nature is non-normative. If natural norms could be discovered, then it would be *at least possible* that the is-ought gap is not a fatal problem for ethical naturalism. 

There are, of course, other problems for ethical naturalism in general: the "Open Question" argument is a major one. Even supposing we discovered some characteristic of a species -- say, that it pursues its own survival. It is in order to query whether it *ought* to pursue its own survival? Natural 


### Nature or Human Nature? Forms and Teloi in Nature, Empirical Naturalism or Excellence Naturalism, Strict Naturalism or Liberal Naturalism

There are two competing strategies to be found among the neo-Aristotelians for pre-emptively undercutting the is-ought gap via natural normativity.[@mcdowell1998two; @annas2005naturalism] One strategy is to defend the view that humanity is naturally and inherently teleological. For example, perhaps one of the functions of being a practically rational creature is that humans construct for themselves goals and attempt to achieve them by various means. On this view, ethical conclusions are irreducibly based upon human culture, excellence, or rationality. Call this "Social Teleology".[@farreira2011reasons calls this "excellence naturalism".] Social Teleology is the safer of the two strategies, and is followed by McDowell, Hursthouse, and the early MacIntyre. The second strategy is more ambitious and more risky. It is to defend the view that other parts of nature (such as living creatures) are naturally and inherently teleological.  For example, perhaps one of the functions of *being alive at all* is that plants and animals act to survive and perform whatever instinctual actions are necessary for them to grow and develop into the state of species-specific maturity. At least some natural entities -- living organisms -- have ineliminable, irreducible, normative properties.[Compare with @nagel2012mind, 117. The existence of life can "give rise to beings of the kind that have a good-—beings for which things can be good or bad."] Call this Natural Teleology. Natural Teleology is the preferred strategy of Foot, Thompson, and the later MacIntyre, and others.[@ward1971kant; @arnhart1988; @johnson2005; @huneman2006naturalising;  @brown2008virtue; @leunissen2010explanation; @perlman2009modern; @barham2011.]  In the spirit of devil-may-care adventure seeking, I shall pursue the more ambitious strategy of defending natural normativity in all living things, not just human beings. However, the notion of human (and only human) normativity remains a fail-safe. For those who find the concept of natural normativity completely unpalettable, I hope to render it at least conceivable. For those who remain unconvinced, I shall hope to convince them that the facts of social teleology are enough to ground the theory of virtue I develop in a later chapter. 

I should mention a third -- even more ambitious -- sort of strategy is to defend the view that *all* of nature is teleological. This is the notion that everything -- including stars and rocks -- "has a purpose", as if the cosmos were an orchestra being played. Call this Cosmic Teleology. Though such natural normativity in the form of natural teleology has its recent defenders.[@mulgan2015purpose; @nagel2012mind; @kreeft2012]  But even in my spirit of adventure seeking, I do not wish to venture this far. Natural normativity in the form of natural teleology is sufficient to ground a theory of ethics in observations about human nature as practical, rational animals. 

Each of these two predominant strategies faces its major challenge. For example, even if the first strategy of *human* natural normativity could pre-emptively undercut the is-ought gap, the major worry is no such thing as a universal human nature from which we might derive normative conclusions. Even the singular noun phrase "human nature" is liable to sound mystical, like a platonic universal underlying all human beings. Bernard Williams summarizes the antiquated worldview that many are suspicious of:

>The idea of a naturalistic ethics was born of a deeply teleological outlook, and its best expression, in many ways, is still to be found in Aristotle's philosophy, a philosophy according to which there is inherent in each natural kind of thing an appropriate way for things of that kind to behave.[Cf. @williams1995making 109] 

The problem, of course, is that if human beings are a "mess" (as Williams puts it) then the normative conclusions to be derived would be equally messy. Humans are occasionally irrational and always variable. Human beings posit themselves, create themselves, define their values, chart their destinies, and all in different ways. 

The second strategy has its own, even bigger, problems. Even if natural normativity in the form of teleology in the non-human world *could possibly* underwrite normative conclusions about human ethics, how would we confirm the hypothesis that there is such a thing as natural normativity? Is the hypothesis scientific or not? For many, scientific naturalism just is the commitment to believe all and only the best deliverances of all the sciences. Abandoning the search for natural teleology was a harbinger of modern science; Francis Bacon and others believed that the search for final causes corrupted science. So, if best science tells us that nature is *only* descriptive, natural normativity is dismissed out of court.^[Cf. Bacon, *New Organon*, Book I. XLVIII “Although the most general principles in nature ought to be held merely positive, as they are discovered, and cannot with truth be referred to a cause, nevertheless the human understanding being unable to rest still seeks something prior in the order of nature. And then it is that in struggling toward that which is further off it falls back upon that which is nearer at hand, namely, on final causes, which have relation clearly to the nature of man rather than to the nature of the universe; and from this source have strangely defiled philosophy.”]

And many scientific naturalists do indeed think that the scientific conception of "bald nature" (McDowell's phrase for non-normative nature) is incompatible with the kind of natural normativity found in Foot's brand of neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism. Evolutionary biology, for instance, tells us that genetically modern humankind is the latest in a series of species. This is prima facie in tension with the notion of human nature. Ernst Mayr puts the alleged tension between the flexibility of evolutionary species and a fixed human nature in this way: 

>The concepts of unchanging essences and of complete discontinuities between every *eidos* (type) and all others make genuine evolutionary thinking impossible. I agree with those who claim that the essentialist philosophies of Aristotle and Plato are incompatible with evolutionary thinking.[@mayr1970populations 4]

Other ethical naturalists like Richard Boyd and Peter Railton would be quick to observe, at this juncture, that natural kinds themselves are part of the vocabulary of natural science.[@boyd1991realism; @boyd1988moral; @railton1986moralrealism] And indeed, part of my strategy for defending the truth and scientific credentials of Footian naturalism is to appeal to generic truths about natural kinds. 

Not all the neo-Aristotelians are optimistic about the strategy of grounding human ethics in natural normativity. Even if natural teleological facts are among those facts that can be hypothesized and confirmed scientifically, there remains one final problem for this strategy. Which teleological facts are we to pick out? Empirically, some acorns become fully grown, mature oaks, but other acorns become stulted, sickly specimens. Most acorns never become anything other than acorns before they disintegrate into dust in the soil. Similarly, some animals protect their young while other animals abandon or even consume their young. Some humans are kind and gentle while others are vicious and cruel. Anscombe anticipates this worry when she says: 

>The search for "norms" might lead someone to look for laws of nature, as if the universe were a legislator; but in the present day this is not likely to lead to good results: it might lead one to eat the weaker according to the laws of nature, but would hardly lead anyone nowadays to notions of justice."[@anscombe1958 14] 

And McDowell's worries I will review below. Despite this battery of legitimate worries, I shall defend Foot's strategy of Natural Teleology against McDowell's strategy of Social Teleology. In doing so, I shall summarize and bolster her arguments, offering a more rigorous argument for the fundamental premise that some natural facts are brutely normative, teleological facts. In the end, I do not think these two notions of normativity are *contradictory*. A "third type" of naturalism would combine and synthesize them.^[@fink. The criteria for this third sort of naturalism are sketched brilliantly by @toner2008sorts. Such third kind of naturalistic theory would be comprehensive. It would provide an anti-dualistic account of first nature and "second nature", of biology and culture, of animality and rationality. But more of these things later.]

## An Initial Argument for Natural Normativity

Let's begin with Philippa Foot. Foot argues that human virtues are instances of a broader class of natural properties: 'natural goodness.'[@foot2001natural; cf. @levy2009philippa] to earn an audience for her argument, her first chapter (which she call a "fresh start") clears some shaky assumptions inherited from Hume and Moore. Instead of treating human valuations as sui generis, a miraculous new appearance in the cosmos that only appears with the existence of humans, hat we should expand our scope to examine our status as natural entities. She is well aware that her offering is likely to offend the ears of some listeners. Her defense is the thought (drawn from Wittgenstein) that crude beginnings are often a necessary first step on the way something refined. 

THe kind of "shaky assumption" she means is this: Moore assumed that "good" was the ultimate ethical predicate under review. By contrast, she argues that statements like "pleasure is good" are not good paradigms for philosophical reflection. Evaluation of human creatures and evaluation of plants and animals follow *the same logical pattern*. In such evaluations, good is good *for*. Contrast 'good' with other predicates like 'red' or 'beautiful.' In a statement such as 'the house is beautiful', the predicate 'beautiful' doesn't need a complement. The house is *beautiful* -- full stop. But 'good' (like 'useful') has a different logical function. 'The house is useful' does need a complement -- the house is useful *for a mom of six, or useful for an artist,* or what have you.  Similarly, 'good' always means *good for someone* or *for something.* 'Good' always needs a complement. If this crude beginning is anywhere near to correct, we can distance ourselves from Moore's starting point and build on another starting point: the life-form of human beings. 

In this Foot agrees with Thompson's groundbreaking *Representation of Life*. There, he argues that the concept of "life" is not, as it may seem to some, a property of some beings where *being* is the fundamental concept; rather "life" is a fundamental concept.[@thompson1995representation]  Thompson reviews and refutes a variety of biological definitions of life such as reproduction, growth, metabolisis, etc., for these properties depend on a prior understanding of life. He says, "Vital description of individual organisms is itself the primitive expression of a conception of things in terms of 'life-form' or 'species', and if we want to understand these categories in philosophy we must bring them back to that form of description."[@thompson2008life 57] When we observe and examine living things we rightly employ some shared categories and our conclusions rightly share a logical structure. What is that common structure? Every individual living being is a member of a species or life-form. And different life-forms are subject to different normative appraisals. 

Humans are certainly a unique *kind* of living being with a unique life-form. And we shall examine below what difference the differences make. As a preview, morality is (correctly) thought to be action-guiding. Hume and Moore (correctly) argue that moral principles cannot be merely descriptive; they must motivate us to act or refrain from acting. (Furthermore, moral theories must be able to retroactively explain *why* we acted or refrained from acting, and help us to evaluate actions or abstentions, in ourselves and others.) Call this the Practicality Requirement.  But the Practicality Requirement is not necessarily best met by positing that moral reasons are inextricably tied to conative psychological states. Rather, the action-guiding facts in the case of natural goodness are facts humans, facts about objects in the world, and facts about our relation to those objects. But more on this below. 

Foot concludes that:

>goodness and badness, and therefore about evaluation in its most general form; but we might equally have been thinking in terms of, say, strength and weakness or health and disease, or again about an individual plant or animal being or not being as it should be, or ought to be, in this respect or that. Let us call the conceptual patterns found there, patterns of natural normativity.[@foot2001natural 38]

Another way of putting this point is that some properties we can call 'goodness' are primary qualities of nature. Obviously, some will worry that this picture of nature is not the scientific picture of nature. McDowell's objection bears some similarities. 

## The Initial Argument for Social Teleology

McDowell's objection is that goodness is one thing and natural facts another. He urges that the is-ought gap is indeed a real distinct between human normativity (on the one side) and natural descriptivitiy (on the other). This objection he shares with non-naturalist realists, subjectivists, and moral anti-realists. A quotation from express his relation to Foot:

>Philippa Foot has long urged the attractions of ethical naturalism. I applaud the negative part of her point, which is to reject various sorts of subjectivism and supernaturalist rationalism. But I doubt whether we can understand a positive naturalism in the right way without first rectifying a constriction that the concept of nature is liable to undergo in our thinking. Without such preliminaries, what we make of ethical naturalism will not be the radical and satisfying alternative to Mrs Foot’s targets that naturalism can be. Mrs Foot’s writings do not pay much attention to the concept of nature in its own right, and this leaves a risk that her naturalism may seem to belong to this less satisfying variety. I hope an attempt to explain this will be an appropriate token of friendship and admiration.[@mcdowell1998mindvalue 167]

As this quotation makes clear, McDowell shares Foot's rejection of "subjectivism and supernaturalist rationalism" but he disputes her "concept of nature". McDowell's classifies his own view as a "sort of naturalism" -- namely "relaxed naturalism."^[He calls it by a variety of other names: 'liberal' naturalism' (@mcdowell1996mind 89, 98); 'acceptable naturalism' (@mcdowell1998mindvalue 197). Like Thomas Nagel, he also finds friends in Plato and Aristotle, calling his view ‘Greek naturalism’ (@mcdowell1996mind 174), ‘Aristotelian naturalism’ (@mcdowell1996mind 196), ‘naturalism of second nature’ (@mcdowell1996mind 86), or ‘naturalized platonism’ (@mcdowell1996mind 91). Cf. @fink 204; and @goetz2008naturalism] Farreira calls McDowell type views "excellence naturalism" to contrast with (Foot's brand of) "empirical naturalism". 

What is his objection to Foot's view? She thinks that normative facts are response-independent features of nature. He says that the naive realist view (that moral values are response-independent) is "impossible -- at least on reflection -- to take seriously..."[@shafer2007foundations 137]  The reason McDowell can't take naive realism seriously is that he finds one sort of motivational internalism absurd. He points to a "worry about how something that is brutely *there* could nevertheless stand in an internal relation to some exercise of human sensibility."[@shafer2007foundations  143] In this McDowell agrees with Mackie: the "central doctrine of European moral philosophy" is a mistake;[@mackie] it is wrong to think that some things *merit* certain responses by virtue of what they are and what we are. 

Yet McDowell does not conclude (as many do), that therefore values are subjective -- that there is no such thing as natural normativity. McDowell's anti-dualist position here (as elswhere!) is liable to puzzle or frustrate some philosophers. He is not a realist; but he is not an anti-realist. He is an "anti-anti-realist". McDowell is always fighting on two fronts, attacking a position without thereby supporting its apparent opposite. (Similarly, in *Mind and World* he attempts to dissolve the "vacillation" between naive empirical realism and "Rampont Platonism".)  It may be worthwhile to make the contextual observation that McDowell's position here reflects his broader project of *dissolving dualisms*. He says he is influenced by two main sources: the "Socratic tradition" and Wittgenstein.[@mcdowell1998mindvalue preface] From the Socratic tradition he draws a way of thinking in which dualisms do not even arise. And from the later Wittgenstein he draws a way of doing "therapeutic" philosophy[@mcdowell2008critics] -- philosophy that ‘leaves everything as it is’^[Wittgenstein, *Philosophical Investigations.* Section 124]. That is, McDowell believes many philosophical puzzles arise not from puzzling reality but from errors in *our own thinking*, so we need "therapy": dualisms need to be *exorcized*. 

It makes sense that McDowell disputes both Foot's brand of moral realism and also its apparent opposite, subjectivism and anti-realism. But what is the alternative to the apparently exhaustive dualism of seeing values (or norms) as *either* facts of nature like primary qualities *or* unreal, illusory, and purely subjective. His answer is that values are "secondary qualities" or "dispositional properties" of nature. His essay "Values and Secondary Qualities" argues that values are like colors and unlike shapes.[@mcdowell2007values. I shall cite this anthology. The essay is also printed in @mcdowell1998mindvalue, chapter 7.] We might paraphrase this thesis by saying that "natural normativity" is a quality *in the world* (not just in our heads) but it is not Lockean "primary qualities." It is, rather, Lockean secondary qualities. 

Yet McDowell also disagrees with the opposite extreme of Foot's view, as represented by those (such as J.L. Mackie, Alan Gibbard, and Simon Blackburn) who believe that normativity is "projected" by philosophers and scientists onto the natural facts. Mackie's error theory gets right the common sense view that "ordinary evaluative thought [is] a matter of sensitivity to aspects of the world."[@shafer2007foundations 137] Secondary qualities are "subjective" in that they cannot be adequately conceived "except in terms of certain subjective states"[@shafer2007foundations  139] but not in that they are therefore illusory. A secondary quality is not "a mere figment of the subjective state that purports to be an experience of it."[@shafer2007foundations  139] 

He says a secondary property ascription is true "in virtue of the object's disposition to present a certain sort of perceptual appearance."[@shafer2007foundations  138] Experience of secondary qualities is a (sense) perceptual experience. This a Lockean doctrine. Redness is not *merely* a microscopic texture property (say, the texture that scatters all light waves except red ones) because microscopic textures don't *look red* and things that *look red* appear so to observers with no knowledge of such textures. 

Colors are response-dependent, while other properties (say, 'squareness') are response-independent. Color-properties must be defined partly by their "objective" or response-independent aspects and partly phenomenologically. Shape-properties, by contrast, can be defined by their objective or mind-independent aspects. It makes no sense to speak of what *redness is* apart from perceptions of red *in perceivers*. Similarly, it makes no sense to speak of "dangerousness" apart from a subject who is potentially vulnerable. So, perhaps, it also makes no sense to speak of "rightness" apart from a subject who potentially judges the value of a thing. 

Yet by the same token right and wrong are not *purely* invented. The property of "being such as to look red" may or may not be *have ever been perceived as red* by any observer (if, for example, the appropriate conditions have never obtained). So a Lockean secondary quality may be response-independent in some sense, but it is not *redness as such*. It is the dispositional property that is disposed to present us with a appearance of a particular phenomenal character. So values (like colors) are dispositional properties. 

The theory of danger also helps McDowell in his conclusion deny that his view is a variant of "projectivism." The "epistemology of danger" that arises from McDowell's "theory of danger"[@shafer2007foundations  142-3] helps explain moral epistemology. There is *something about red things themselves* that makes them give us redness experiences; there is something about the dangerous animal itself that gives us fear experiences. That something is not *the form of red* or *the form of danger*, but it is also not *nothing.* The "theory of danger" is intended to capture this "something" with the important notion of *merit*. Red objects *just appear as red* to us under the proper circumstances. They *just do* dispose us to have red experiences. But dangerous objects *merit* appearing fearful and dangerous. They *merit* that we have a fear experience. 

### Problems for McDowell (Fink, Toner)

