#Chapter 3. Virtues as Excellent Character Traits

*"[Wisdom] teaches temperance and prudence, justice, and courage."* Wisdom 8:7.

**Contents**

<!-- MarkdownTOC -->

- Introduction
- Virtues as human traits needed by practical reasoners like us
- Philippa Foot: Excellence of the Rational Will
- John McDowell: The Moral Outlook on How to Live
- Alasdair MacIntyre: Rational Tradition
- Compare, Contrast, Synthesize
- How many virtues?
- Are virtues inborn?
- Is the pursuit of virtue egoistic?
- Questions for future chapters

<!-- /MarkdownTOC -->


## Introduction

In this chapter, I offer an account of human virtue per se. I begin by summarizing and discussion the three accounts from Foot, McDowell, and MacIntyre, before attempting to point out the discrepencies, harmonize the commanalities, and synthesize what is good in each. I defend the resulting novel neo-Aristotelian account against various objections. 

## Virtues as human traits needed by practical reasoners like us


Before we talk about the four cardinal virtues in the recent neo-Aristotelians, we need to step back and do some of the formal work applying the premises of the argument from the previous chapters to the present topic: excellence.

The Greek word often translated as 'virtue' is *αρετή*, and means 'excellence'. We must beware a misunderstanding here. Not all excellence is *moral* excellence. Foot, for one, recommends examining Aristotle and Aquinas (and others) for their view on virtue, but cautions against terminological misunderstandings. Firstly, *Arete* for them refers “also to arts, and even to excellences of the speculative intellect whose domain is theory rather than practice”[@foot2002virtues 2].  Secondly, *arete ethikai* (or *virtues morales*) do not correspond to our moral virtues. For those of us who take the traditional list seriously, there are four moral virtues: courage, temperance, wisdom, and justice; for them, wisdom or *phronesis/prudentia* is an intellectual virtue. Thirdly, not all the qualities we moderns might call "moral qualities"  (e.g., unselfishness) can be attached to a genuine virtue. Instead of simply assuming that the terms 'excellence' or even 'moral excellence' can provide us a short-cut to understanding the concept of virtue, we must do the work ourselves with attentiveness.

The moral virtues or vices, as we have argued, are those excellent qualities a person can acquire that both enable and partly constitute the realization of our human telos or enable and partly constitute its opposite. 

Even so, 'excellence' is a relative concept; an excellent knife is one that *cuts well* where an excellent guard dog is one that barks loudly, is hostile to strangers, and so on. Excellence is, then, relative to a given object's function. Of course, the objects just mentioned (knife and guard dog) have artifical functions assigned to them by human users. But as we have argued above, natural objects perform functions as well that can be 'read off' the object's activity. If one knows the natural function of an entity, evaluations as to its excellence or defect are not purely subjective impositions of the evaluator's preferences or opinions, nor are they "facts" given by the situation. Rather, the evaluator must judge the function of the thing and judge how well its performance matches up or fails to match up to that function. 

Now, it is very arguable whether humans qua humans have a function. I shall discuss this in a bit more detail in a later chapter. It is also arguable, even if we do, whether we have one definite function (e.g., to think) or a an unlimited set of functions (e.g., to do and become whatever we want, whatever that might be) or some definite plurality (e.g., to survive, to reproduce, to enjoy ourselves, and to reason). 

Excellence is relative to generic truths about the nature and potential of natural kinds. We have argued that human beings, too, have a nature and have argued that it is our nature to be rational animals. Even in extreme cases when a person's set of potentialites for rational activity such as speech and abstract thought is not realized because of genetic disorder, injury, or mental or physical illness, they are *a human being* by virtue of having a *human nature*, tragically unrealized or unrealizable. 

Human being as rational *animals* by nature need to breathe, eat, sleep, and stay warm, deal with the urgings of our sexual nature, and so on. Human beings as *rational* animals need to live and make decisions. We need to plan, think, deliberate, reflect, assume identities, pursue projects, and so on. It is undeniable that we *act* and we sometimes *act for an end*. Unlike animals who *act* and even *pursue* objects like food and safety, we pursue ends *as ends*. So, we may tentatively hypothesize that the qualities that enable us to pursue our ends *well* would be excellent qualities. The practical, rational agents who consistently succeed at pursuing and achieving their ends would be models of virtue.  I shall have much more to say below about what ends people *have* or *ought to have* and about the indeterminate concept of a human *telos*.^[Eudaimonists believe our telos to be human flourishing or happiness. Others believe it is something else, such as genetic proliferation, the creation of the self, or what have you. We shall return to this in a later chapter]

The virtues, on this account, admit of an initial, formal definition: virtues are those dispositions to act well in the universal projects of human life and to react well to the universal challenges of human life. 

What detail can we give to this formal definition? Let's begin by working through the virtue accounts of Foot, McDowell, and MacIntyre. 

## Philippa Foot: Excellence of the Rational Will

Foot argues that virtue is excellence of the rational will. I have hitherto avoided the word 'will' because it is not a cross-cultural concept.^[Cf.@Bradshaw2009mind. There Bradshaw distinguishes the cluster of concepts such as heart, mind, and will, and shows that for the Hebrews and for Aristotle they did not have a concept of a 'will' as a sub-rational faculty for choosing.] Even Foot will expand her concept of will beyond its typical meaning to include intentions (see below). Since now is not the place to distinguish the two concepts, I shall herein treat her 'rational will' as identical to my 'practical rationality'. 

We saw above that virtues are, for Foot, examples of 'natural goodness.' This phrase that so puzzles many of Foot's contemporaries (and our own contemporaries) indicates that the concept of goodness being deployed in appelates such as a 'good person' is structurally the same as the concept of goodness in 'a good oak' or 'a good wolf.' A good person exemplifies those good-making features shared by all exemplary members of a natural species. What exactly can we say about such good-making features of rational animals? 

Foot's account of virtue unfolds across four key propositions. (1) Virtues are beneficial, to self and others, while vices are bad for self and others; (2) virtues are distinct from skills (such as strength, keen eyesight, reliable memory, etc.) because such excellences are not excellence of will or practical reason; (3) virtues are corrective of some tempting vice; and (4) virtues are only operative toward good ends. Let's examine each of these propositions in turn. 

### Virtue is beneficial 

She begins with necessary conditions: A virtue is beneficial. She says, “Human beings do not get on well without them. Nobody can get on well if he lacks courage, and does not have some measure of temperance and wisdom, while communities where justice and charity re lacking are apt to be wretched places to live, as Russia was under the Stalinist terror.”[@foot2002virtues 2-3] But whom is benefited? Does a person possessing a virtue benefit the virtuous person or the society in which the virtuous person lives? For some virtues, the answer is more clearly “both”: temperance benefits oneself and one’s family or community. For other virtues, such as justice or charity, the answer is less clear. She says, “It is a reasonable opinion that on the whole a man is better off for being charitable and just, but this is not to say that circumstances may not arise in which he will have to sacrifice everything for charity or justice.”[@foot2002virtues 3] 

Foot finds the alleged paradox between what we might wish to call "selfish" and "altruistic" virtues overblown. The cases in which virtuous deeds necessitate the loss of other goods are not so devastating as they might appear. It might be that, on occasion, it is better (say) for my family that I sacrifice my health in working hard to earn higher wages; while on other occasions it is better for my family that I sacrifice higher wages keep myself healthy. Geach similarly downplays this alleged emnity between my "inclinations" and the moral law, pointing out that oftentimes my inclinations lead me to obey the law. 

She recommends "leaving unsolved problems behind us:"

>Let us say then... that virtues are in general beneficial characteristics, and indeed ones that a human being needs to have, for his own sake and that of his fellows. This will not, however, take us far towards a definition of a virtue, since there are many other qualities of a man that may be similarly beneficial, as for instance bodily characteristics such as health and physical strength, and mental powers such as those of memory and concentration.[@foot2002virtues 4]

### Virtue is more than strength 

The more interesting question is how to distinguish moral virtue from a great memory, keen eyesight, or other admirable qualities we do not intuitively classify as virtuous. 

What, for example, distinguishes virtue from strength? At first glance, the answer seems to be something about the *will*; Foot thinks virtues are revealed not only by a person’s abilities but by his or her *intentions.* But what are intentions? Foot argues that the ‘will’ must be understood in its broadest sense, “to cover what is wished for as well as what is sought.”[@foot2002virtues 5] Intentions are not the *only* thing we judge, for a well-intentioned nincompoop who always harms when "helping" is rightly judged as deficient in virtue. Neither do we only judge the result of a person's action, for we sometimes exculpate a failing performance in part because the person *meant well*, though it also perhaps it the exculpation is called for because circumstances were not favorable, chances of success were low, etc. 

Foot attempts to capture the point that we admire someone who not only does the right thing but who has conditioned himself to do the right thing fluently and almost instantly. She quotes from John Hersey’s novel *A Single Pebble* in which the narrator relates watching a man save a boy from drowning:

>It was the head tracker's marvelous swift response that captured my admiration at first, his split second solicitousness when he heard a cry of pain, his finding in mid‐air, as it were, the only way to save the injured boy. But there was more to it than that. His action, which could not have been mulled over in his mind, showed a deep, instinctive love of life, a compassion, an optimism, which made me feel very good.

Foot’s comment on this passage is this: 

>What this suggests is that a man's virtue may be judged by his innermost desires as well as by his intentions; and this fits with our idea that a virtue such as generosity lies as much in someone's attitudes as in his actions. Pleasure in the good fortune of others is, one thinks, the sign of a generous spirit; and small reactions of pleasure and displeasure often the surest signs of a man's moral disposition.[@foot2002virtues 5]

In other words, the outward behavior (the swift response) discloses not only the man’s intentions and attitudes, but something even deeper; settled dispositions that can be betrayed in the smallest facial expressions or the most “instinctive” gut reactions. Robert Adams's concept of 'being for' is helpful in this connection. We intuitively (and correctly) judge that one must *be for* the good in the most general sense of orienting oneself -- in thoughts, deeds, words, intentions, and wishes --  toward the good. 

If virtuous dispositions are "multi-track,"[@hursthouse1998] is it necessary that good intentions and attitudes be effective in good action? If so, it seems that virtues become skills. But as we saw comparing virtue with strength, there seems to be something flat about calling the virtuous person *merely* skillful.^[Julia Annas's argument that virtues are skills of a particular type takes advantage of the intuitive similarity between virtue and skill. Cf. @annas2011intelligent.] The worry here is that we don't want to call skills morally valuable when they do not seem to have any moral import. Is a contracter who excels at hammering 16d nails into wooden frames to be admired for his *virtue*? Is the quarterback who can make accurate throws under pressure virtuous? This seems to us moderns to smack too much of the "Homeric" sense of virtue as *any* admirable quality. 

What, if anything, differentiates virtues from skills? Foot's solution is an interpretation of the line from Aristotle that "in the matter of arts and skills... voluntary error is preferable to involuntary error, while in the matter of virtues... it is the reverse."[@foot2002virtues 7] While this might be a bit baffling, the thought seems to be that deliberately erring in an art or skill is compatible with mastery; the teacher can err on purpose in order to instruct students. By contrast, deliberately erring in morality is still an error. One ought not steal to demonstrate to children that stealing is wrong. 

### Corrective

Foot also argues that virtues are "corrective". That is, each one stands "at a point at which there is some temptation to be resisted or deficiency of motivation to be made good."[@foot2002virtues 8] In this discussion, she is illuminating a statement of Aristotle that "virtues are about what is difficult for men" and also objecting to a statement of Kant that *only* "actions done out of a sense of duty" have moral worth. In this connection, she discusses Kant's problem of the happy philanthropist. This problem is the troubling and dissonant conclusion that if a very generous philanthropist gets great pleasure out of helping others then such actions display no moral worth. Surely a commonsense moral judgment would accord moral worth to the very fact that the philanthropist *enjoys* doing what is good (which Aristotle builds into the definition of a virtuous person); he doesn’t just grit his teeth and do good (which Aristotle would call mere *continence*). 

Kant's error, according to Foot, is in failing to distinguish that which is "in accord" with virtue from that which is *virtuous* full stop. It may be, for example, that a novice tennis player makes an expert shot while remaining merely a novice. The hit is in accord with excellence but is not, in this case, an instance of excellence -- only beginner's luck. In her self-love example, Foot points out that there is no virtue required to eat one's breakfast and avoid life-threatening danger, but there may sometimes be cases where self-love is a duty -- even a difficult, painful duty. She says, "sometimes it is what is owed to others that should keep a man from destroying himself, and then he may act out of a sense of duty."[@foot2002virtues 13] So the solution to the happy philanthropist problem is that if he really does have such a character as to be delighted helping others, he is morally praiseworthy *because he has worked to achieve that character*.  As she says: 

>For charity is, as we said, a virtue of attachment as well as action, and the sympathy that makes it easier to act with charity is part of the virtue. The man who acts charitably out of a sense of duty is not to be undervalued, but it is the other who most shows virtue and therefore to the other that most moral worth is attributed.[foot2002virtues 14]

Since charity is a "virtue of attachment" (I should say "affection"), the feelings of the philanthropist count in favor of proving the presence of a virtue. 

Of course, commonsense judges that a philanthropist who persists in virtue even when he does not enjoy giving is also praiseworthy. Foot explains this too. She allows that it may take greater virtue for a man to *persist* in his philanthropy *even when* it brings him no delight. 

>Only a detail of Kant's presentation of the case of the dutiful philanthropist tells on the other side. For what he actually said was that this man felt no sympathy and took no pleasure in the good of others because ‘his mind was clouded by some sorrow of his own’, and this is the kind of circumstance that increases the virtue that is needed if a man is to act well.

For someone who has acquired a kind of immunity to some kinds of temptation is through sustained effort and in many small victories is, ipso facto, especially admirable. Virtues are indeed corrective of tempting vices and tempting moral errors. However, the presence of temptation is not a necessary condition for the presence of a virtue. 


### Virtues are operative toward good ends

Can virtue enable the more efficient achievement of ignoble aims? On the one hand, examples are easy to furnish: a murderer displays courage; a prude displays temperance. It seems commonsensical that whatever attributes we designate as courageous can be found in agents pursuing bad ends. On the other hand, the Aristotelian line excludes such a possibility by definition. Jonathan Sanford's recent monograph, *Before Virtue*, argues that Aristotle's doctrine is "ethics insists it is impossible to exercise any virtue, with the exception of technical skill, wrongly."[@sanford2015before 163] Foot attempts to do justice to both these concerns. The analogy is to poisons or solvents: 

>It is quite natural to say on occasion ‘P does not act as a poison here’ though P is a poison and it is P that is acting here. Similarly courage is not operating as a virtue when the murderer turns his courage, which is a virtue, to bad ends. Not surprisingly the resistance that some of us registered was not to the expression ‘the courage of the murderer’ or to the assertion that what he did ‘took courage’ but rather to the description of that action as an act of courage or a courageous act. It is not that the action could not be so described, but that the fact that courage does not here have its characteristic operation is a reason for finding the description strange.[@foot2002virtues 16]

An agent's commission of an otherwise virtuous action may be a mistake *for that agent* at that time. This may seem ad hoc, but we must remember that Foot is attempting to make space for the "commonsense" observation that some good traits operate to bad ends *within* the philosophically rigorous definition of virtue as beneficial. 

One objection Foot responds to is the worry some might have that she is saying *only* those who are completely virtuous are virtuous at all. She has two responses: wisdom always operates as a virtue. While it might make some sense to speak of "foolish courage" (recklessness) or "foolish moderation" (prudishness) it makes no sense to speak of 'foolish wisdom'. Since wisdom always operates as a virtue, we admire wisdom perhaps most of all. As we shall see in John McDowell's discussion of the virtuous person's perceptual capacities, it might be that when we admire a person's courage or moderation,we are often admiring the *wisdom in* the courage and the moderation. 

A second response, though, is that we do admire some who have only a subset of all the virtues: 

>There are some people who do possess all these virtues and who are loved and admired by all the world, as Pope John XXIII was loved and admired. Yet the fact is that many of us look up to some people whose chaotic lives contain rather little of wisdom or temperance, rather than to some others who possess these virtues. And while it may be that this is just romantic nonsense I suspect that it is not.[@foot2002virtues 17]

Even those whose overall life is a mishmash of virtues and vices are admirable. My interpretation of this sentiment is that such are admirable insofar as they demonstrate some excellent qualities. 

### Transitioning from Foot to McDowell

For Foot, virtues are those beneficial qualities that we need qua human beings in order to safely navigate the normal human temptations to corrupt oneself and others. These qualities are what Hursthouse calls multi-track, embroiling our whole psychology as it is directed by what might call the 'will' or 'practical rationality', including intentions, attitudes, deliberative choices, and habits. Virtuous traits are only 'operative' toward good ends, and so even once acquired they stand in need of the governance of practical wisdom. 

## John McDowell: The Moral Outlook on How to Live

*A disastrous idea ... has haunted Western philosophy since the seventeenth century... that perception involves an interface between the mind and the ‘external’ objects we perceive.* (Hilary Putnam, “Sense, Nonsense and the Senses,” *Journal of Philosophy*, 465.)

McDowell's writings on virtue and value have been formed by two main influences: the "Socratic tradition" and Wittgenstein.[@mcdowell1998mindvalue] As we briefly saw above, his concern has been to dissolve worries about the mind's relation to the world, specifically those worries that arise from false dualisms. The Greeks had a world-view within which such dualisms did not arise; so perhaps some of their conceptions can help us for whom such dualisms arise as a matter of course in many philosophical contexts. 

One criticism of McDowell is that he is not a realist but merely an "anti-anti-realist". I think this criticism misses the mark. His goal is not to *defend* an Aristotelian sort of realism in the place of subjectivism but (like Wittgenstein) to attack subjectivism and then cease to talk about the issue. Failing adequately to defend realism criticizes McDowell for missing the bullseye on a target he was not aiming at. Another criticism of McDowell is that he posits a dualism of his own: the dualism between (primary) nature and "second nature". Primary nature is the bald, disenchanted world of mindless matter and energy. Second nature is the partially re-enchanted human world of rationality, value, intentionality, social life, culture, and education. This criticism cuts more deeply since, if it can be made to stick, it accuses McDowell of failing to hit the bullseye on the target he explicitly wishes to hit. 

### Virtue as knowledge

McDowell's theses are: 

1. "The point of engaging in ethical reflection... lies in the interest of the question 'How should one live?'"[@mcdowell1979virtue 331]
2. Virtues are kinds of knowledge and *virtue* is a kind of knowledge. 
3. The question of how to live must be approached from "within" a moral outlook and approached "*via* the notion of a virtuous person."[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] 

Let’s examine each of these in turn to uncover McDowell’s account of virtue. 

The first point is that ethical reflection aims at answering the ever relevant question "How should one live?"[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] We notice that ethical reflection is *reflection* about *practice*. It seems to me that this obvious truth is almost too close to be seen, like one’s nose. It is far too often overlooked. We do not *merely* act (like a deer or a dog) nor do we *merely* calculate (like a computer or an angel); we reflect upon what we ought to do, how we ought to live. Such reflection only makes sense concerning issues within my control. Insofar as one cannot but sleep sometimes, the question of whether or not to sleep at all is not an ethical question; it is not in my control. Insofar as one can either stay or go, pursue or avoid, harm or help, such decisions are ethical decisions and the question of how to live is an ethical question. One must decide which larger, longer-term projects to pursue and which objects are worthwhile to obtain; and one must, along the way of these long-term pursuits, decide rather extemporaneously how to react to the vicissitudes of circumstance.  Each of us must decide how to react to the “slings and arrows of outrageous fortune.”^[*Hamlet* III.1]

As for the thesis that virtue is a kind of knowledge, McDowell argues that morality is *practical knowledge* (a “disposition to act well”). Such practical knowledge (and this is the third point) seems to demand "a moral outlook" to act well.[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] To see why it makes sense to conceive of virtue as practical knowledge, suppose that some platitudinous value (say, kindness) is really a virtue. The kind person is reliably kind and is kind *on purpose*. A person who merely happens to be kind or who commits acts of kindness resulting from blind instinct does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. A person who is kind once, or even every now and then, likewise does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. Rather, a kind person is one who is regularly sensitive to a range of reasons for behaving in a particular way. The kind person, McDowell adduces, "has a reliable sensitivity to a certain sort of requirement which situations impose on behavior" and such "deliverances of a reliable sensitivity are cases of knowledge."[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] The kind person *knows* what is called for, is intentional about avoiding cruel or indifferent behavior, and so on. 

If kindness is “a sort of perceptual capacity”, “specialized sensitivity” to a particular range of reasons for action (say, the feelings of others), then perhaps the same holds true for other virtues.[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] In fact, McDowell suggests, the notion that virtues are specialized sensitivities — each a kind of knowledge — helps us understand the Socratic notion of the unity of virtue. 

These reflections support the notion that this kind of knowledge ("sensitivity to reasons") is necessary for the virtue but not sufficient. For it might be that one is sensitive to what another would feel but still fail to act rightly. Why? Perhaps, like the overindulgent parent, one is *too* sensitive to the feelings of the child or *not sensitive enough* to other considerations, like the child’s health or (McDowell’s example) fairness. The virtuous person is sensitive to a whole range of reasons; since reason A and reason B might commend different acts, part of virtue must be the meta-cognitive capacity to reflect upon all those reasons available to one, to rank and order them. 

McDowell’s “preliminary case” that virtue is knowledge is that the “requirement imposed by the situation… must exhaust his reason for acting as he does.”[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] It would disqualify the act as a candidate for an example of kindness if the agent performed it *because* it was kind *and because good repute was likely to follow*. If we run the same calculus on each particular virtue, we can hypothesize that virtuous agents’ behavior in each case is explained by their sensitivity to those particular kinds of reasons. In turn, their behavior in general (when virtuous) is explained by their sensitivity in general. He concludes, “thus the particular virtues are not a batch of Independent sensitivities. Rather, we use the concepts of the particular virtues to mark similarities and dissimilarities among the manifestations of a single sensitivity which is what virtue, in general, is: an ability to recognize requirements which situations impose on one's behavior. It is a single complex sensitivity of the sort which we are aiming to instill when we aim to inculcate a moral outlook.”[@mcdowell1979virtue 333]

**Objection**: An objection to the view that virtue is a “single complex sensitivity” to requirements upon one’s behavior arises from considerations of the internalism/externalism debate regarding moral motivation. Suppose two persons in the same situation are equipped with identical perceptual capacities and so sensitive to the same range of reasons for action, but only one of them does the right thing. If such a supposed situation were to obtain, it would disconfirm McDowell’s conclusion. But, McDowell points out, one man’s *modus ponens* is another man’s *modus tollens.* If virtue is to be identified with a single complex sensitivity, then a supposed situation in which two persons perceive a situation and its practical requirements identically but act differently cannot obtain.[@mcdowell1979virtue 333] Socrates took this line. But McDowell suggests we look to Aristotle.  Aristotle allowed that “appreciation of what [a virtuous person] observes is clouded, or unfocused, by the impact of a desire to do otherwise.”[@mcdowell1979virtue 334] The point of such an allowances is that the break between the sensitivity to reasons (which is virtue) and a resultant wrong action occurs when other psychological factors interfere. What interference? McDowell mentions desires and also a “distortion in one’s appreciation” of the relevant reasons.[@mcdowell1979virtue 334]

**Objection**: McDowell cites Donald Davidson who argues to the effect that a person might fail to perform the resultant right action even without such interfering factors. The reply is that the point is true, but it is not an objection. Aristotle’s account of continence details that continence is not a virtue. The continent person is able to perform the right action because he recognizes it as right, *despite* countervailing pressures (from desires, say) to do the wrong action. Since a fully developed virtue definitionally includes having the proper motivation as well, continence is only needed in the absence of a fully developed virtue. Furthermore, the virtuous person is not always one who “balances” reasons for X against countervailing reasons for Y. The virtuous person is the one for whom simply identifying a reason (“in this situation, courage requires that I run into danger”) silences countervailing reasons. The virtuous persons sees the danger (and perhaps feels rightly apprehensive) but also sees that courage in the face of this danger is required; the latter perception, according to McDowell, “silences” other pressures.[@mcdowell1979virtue 335] The merely continent person has to “weigh” reasons; the virtuous person fluently and instantly *acts* on the best reason.

**Objection**: Is virtue-knowledge *codifiable*? McDowell considers the objection that if virtue is knowledge, ‘knowing-what-to-do’ must be codifiable in propositional form. But ‘knowing-what-to-do’ is not codifiable, so virtue must not be knowledge. On this objection,  the virtuous person enjoys knowledge of one or a few universal ethical precepts and reliably calculates the application of those principles to individual occasions. The virtuous person’s ethical arguments “take the form of a ‘practical syllogism’” wherein the universal proposition is the major premise and the “relevant particular knowledge” is a minor premise, while the issuing conclusion is the judgment of “what is to be done.”[@mcdowell1979virtue 336] Furthermore, on this objection, the defender of Humean moral psychology can keep the identification of relevant particular knowledge with a “minor premise” but substitute the proposed major premise (a proposition such as “It is always good to be courageous”) with a non-cognitive desire or commitment (such as “*I want* to be courageous” or “Be courageous!”). Now, they can explain how a virtuous person and non-virtuous person can both perceive a situation identically but fail to perform the same action with reference to their different desires or commitments. 

The problem with this objection, McDowell thinks, is not so much a problem with our moral theory but a problem with our conception of rationality. The problem stems from a “deep-rooted prejudice” that rationality is a rule-following procedure. If rationality is a rule-following procedure, then it follows that *either* practical rationality and morality are likewise rule-following procedures *or* that practical rationality and morality is not, ultimately, sufficiently *rational*.  Some philosophers (often followers of Hume but not necessarily Hume himself) think that morality is a not rational domain but a domain of sentiments, desires, commitments, approvals, and so on. Other philosophers (often followers of Kant) think that morality is a rational domain and hence must be a matter of identifying first principles and “applying” them to particular situations. But what they share in common is a belief that “rationality must be explicable in terms of being guided by a formulable universal principle.”[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] This common belief McDowell wishes to refute. [In @macintyre1984does. MacIntyre argues a similar point. In this essay, he denies the assumption that normative ethical rules can be derived from universal ethical principles the way we “apply” universal logical truths to particular logical conclusions via a middle term.]  

McDowell’s discussion here (drawing on Wittgenstein and others) is hard to follow. The point seems to be that even apparently obvious cases where the rational thing to do is to follow an objective rule (say, by extending a series of numbers) turn out to be cases of a much messier process in which there is no such objective rule by appeal to which we can explain rational thoughts or behaviors. If Bob instructs Charlie to “add 2” to a number and continue applying the rule indefinitely, we tend to be confident Charlie will produce “2, 4, 6, 8,” etc., which will “churn out the appropriate behavior with the sort of reliability which a physical mechanism, say a piece of clockwork, might have.” We postulate a “psychological mechanism, underlying his behavior, by an inference analogous to that whereby one might hypothesize a physical structure underlying the observable motions of some inanimate object.”[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] The “ground and nature of our confidence” that we will reliably apply rules is not but a common form of life. The ‘form of life’ is a term of art here from Wittgenstein (and quoted with approval from Stanley Cavell) that refers to that difficult-to-define process by which we learn how reliably to use words in our native language, how to make exclamations like a pained “ow!” or an excited “ooh!”, when to laugh at jokes, and when to cry in pity. Our shared rationality, McDowell suggests, is not grounded in “external” objective rules but in a shared form of life or what he calls a “congruence of subjectivities”.[@mcdowell1979virtue 339] McDowell admits this is a disconcerting hypothesis; it induces “vertigo.” But, our response to such vertigo should not be to embrace a “consoling myth”. That myth he says is the two notions that (a) rule-following is a psychological mechanism that — absent mistakes — guarantees consistency, and that there exist objective facts of the matter over and above the congruence of subjectivities. If we abandon these two notions and embrace the model of deductive rationality as grounded only in our intersubjective form of life, then the corresponding model of practical rationality will become tenable. 

3. The question of how to live must be approached from "within" a moral outlook and approached "*via* the notion of a virtuous person"[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] 

McDowell’s solution to the problem of the vertigo we feel when contemplating the dependence of our rational concept-application on nothing more than our shared form of life is to simply accept that we cannot think from a third-person, detached, “sideways on” point of view; we can only think from within our point of view. His main opponent, of course, is the notion that morality can be adduced from an objective third-person sort of view. He says, “The cure for the vertigo, then, is to give up on the idea that philosophical thought, about the sorts of practice in question, should be undertaken at some external standpoint, outside our immersion in our familiar forms of life.”[@mcdowell1979virtue 341] This is part of the movement toward his thesis that that virtues are ethical qualities that only make sense ‘from within’, that they lend a certain kind of perceptive ability to their bearers. 

McDowell points out the familiar case of a discussion or disagreement that end at loggerheads, with both parties asking "But don't you see?" Although it is tempting to want to resolve such loggerheads by appeal to a third-personal point of view standing outside either of our forms of life, McDowell thinks it must be resolved, if at all, from firmly within our form of life. That is not to say that persuasion is not possible. He reassures us that the "Don't you see?" question "can often be supplemented with words aimed at persuasion."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342] Rather, persuasion will consist in "bring[ing] someone to see it as one wants", in one or both parties appreciating reasons they may not have seen before. It sometimes takes efforts to make someone see (to make oneself or others see) "the right way to handle a given situation."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342]

Now, if virtue knowledge is not codifiable then how is it *consistent*? What guarantees that the moral person’s behavior is intelligibly the same from case to case? On the one hand, if moral knowledge is rational then it is consistent from case to case and situation to situation; but if, as McDowell has been arguing, both deductive reasoning and practical reasoning are not merely consistent by being like a rule-following machine or computer, how do we explain the virtuous person's reliably correct behavior? Section 5 of the article answers this question by way of Aristotle's practical syllogisms.

The 'practical syllogism' takes the following shape: 

1. X is good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. (E.g., it is good to instantiate justice in the classroom).
2. Z would be X. (E.g., giving everyone a chance to re-take a quiz that was unavailable due to technical problems would be instantiate justice in my classroom.)
3. Therefore, Z would be good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. 

On the strictly deductive logical model, the role of the major premise is to provide rock solid universal ethical principles from which to derive particular moral duties. But McDowell resists this model. On the strictly non-cognitivist model, without universal ethical principles we are left with universal psychological states (consistent desires, plans, values, or norms). McDowell also resists this. On the non-codifiable model, what does the major premise do? Its role, he says, is to state a "certain conception of how to live... [namely] the *virtuous person's conception* of the sort of life a human being should lead."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343. Emphasis added.] It is clear upon reflection that this account is a sort of circular reasoning. For the virtuous person's conception of how to live is itself conditioned by what he called earlier 'the moral outlook'. That conception of how to live, in turn, conditions what particular saliences are noticed (what minor premises) and generates practical conclusions about what is to be done. What kind of life should a human being lead? The answer "cannot be definitively written down."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] Furthermore, "Any attempt to capture it in words will recapitulate the character of the teaching whereby it might be instilled: generalizations will be approximate at best..."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] The upshot of the combination of non-codifiability with a practical syllogistic form is that the virtuous person takes for a rule of life some conception of how to live but that this conception is part of what it means to be a virtuous person. (Hence the vertigo.)

We might wonder why we are bothering about formal syllogistic reasoning at this point. But this way of understanding the practical syllogism *does* do good job of providing a plausible explanation of moral motivation (reasons one might act in some way) and moral behavior (reasons one acted that way). To paraphrase McDowell: "Explanations of judgments about what to do are explanations of actions."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342. Verbatim, he says: "The explanations, so far treated as explanations of judgments about what to do, are equally explanations of actions."] I can explain your behavior by understanding that you were concerned for your friend’s welfare and reached out to help. Likewise, you can explain your decision to help by assuring me that you are concerned for your friend’s welfare. For McDowell, the general structure of the practical syllogism is useful. He says “the rationality of virtue… is not demonstrable from an external standpoint.”[@mcdowell1979virtue 346]

**Objection:** McDowell cites a common objection, familiarly attributed to Hume, that practical reasons by themselves cannot motivate — that they need the presence of a conative mental state (such as a desire) as well. “Cognition and volition are distinct.” Surely the virtuous person’s behavior is conditioned both by knowledge and their non-cognitive psychological states. In McDowell’s example, one is aware that one’s friend is in trouble and that the friend is able to be comforted (the cognitive bit) and a desire (or motivation or inclination or settled passion) for helping one’s friends (the non-cognitive bit). Surely these two *together* and neither in isolation explains the behavior. 

The problem with this objection is that, as McDowell has plausibly argued, an essential component of the awareness that one’s friend is in trouble is the very sensitivity that is virtue. The difference between the vicious and virtuous person lies not just in their desires and reactions to what they notice about the world but in the noticing itself. Furthermore, McDowell points out, this non-cognitivist makes use of the deductive model of practical reasoning he has been at pains to deflate. 

**Objection:** To be rational, a genuine reason must be verifiable from an external, “neutral standpoint” open to any rational observer whatsoever. Surely *something*, such as scientific or deductive logical beliefs, are objective in the sense that they look the same to any rational being whatsoever. 

Even here, McDowell undermines the objection as based partly in “vertigo”. It is a “craving for a kind of rationality independently demonstrable as such.”[mcdowell1979virtue 346] He admits that the intelligibility and consistency of the virtuous person’s way of life are an “orectic state” but not that it is a straightforward desire as much as “a conception of how to live.”

Although McDowell sees another more “subtle non-cognitivism” arising from the ashes, he does not fully develop it. Rather, he says he suspects “that its origin is a philistine scientism, probably based on the misleading idea that the right of scientific method to rational acceptance is discernible from a more objective standpoint than that from which we seem to perceive the saliences. A scientistic conception of reality is eminently open to dispute. When we ask the metaphysical question whether reality is what science can find out about, we cannot, without begging the question, restrict the materials for an answer to those which science can countenance.”[@mcdowell1979virtue 346]



### Summary

McDowell argues that rational virtue is a kind of knowledge — a kind of sensitivity — against the objection that rational virtue is either a type of universalizable, objective, deductive logic or else non-cognitive. His rebuttal is to deny that deductive reasoning is so objective. Rather, deductive reasoning is not rule-following, except in that we follow a vague collection of rules associated by our common forms of life. We only know deduction, too, from within. So moral reasoning, he avers, we also know from within, by doing it, while doing it, because of our common forms of life. He does not much advance a view of virtue beyond the Aristotelian notion that virtues are qualities of reliable good-choosing, good-acting. He does however limit Aristotle’s optimism about the metaphysical realist assumptions underlying an understanding of deductive reason and practical reason. 


## Alasdair MacIntyre: Rational Tradition

Let's consider MacIntyre’s widely influential view, that the great moral confusion of our time is due, in part, to the fracturing of social and political bonds deriving from a shared understanding of and pursuit of the good.^[Though he is classified as a "virtue ethicist", MacIntyre rejects the label insofar as it does not necessitate a real restoration of the Aristotelian tradition of virtue. Nevertheless, he has contributed to virtue ethics, as well as a surprising number of other fields: the history of philosophy, political science, epistemology, the philosophy of education, sociology, and more.] 

### Initial account

MacIntyre's concept of virtue is derived from (but not limited to) a careful study of the history of the concept within the broader western tradition. In order to capture all of the (sometimes opposing) features of virtue from Homer to Jane Austen, MacIntyre unfolds three stages: the first is virtues relative to "practices." The second is virtues relative to the whole of an integrated human life. The third phase is virtue related to tradition and rationality.^[ Now, for MacIntyre "tradition" is almost synonymous to rationality. He calls it "tradition-constituted rationality". We will examine that notion in the next chapter.]

The first stage is that virtues are “acquired human qualities that enable their possessor to achieve those goods which are internal to practices."[@macintyre1984after 191] This is perhaps a puzzling definition. Let's examine it a bit more closely.

First, he says virtues are acquired *human* qualities. Presumably, human qualities are opposed to analogous qualities of non-human animals. The flexible flagellum of a bacterium, the swiftness of a deer -- formal or functional biological features that enable an animal to survive and thrive -- are excluded from the class of virtues by definition. MacIntyre's later *Dependent Rational Animals* retracts the assumed divide between human and non-human animals. But here, virtues do not arise from nor depend on biology. In this, MacIntyre's initial formulation disagrees with Foot but agrees with McDowell, as we shall see. 

Secondly, virtues are *acquired* human qualities. This is an important point and relates to the first, for natural biological features are inborn. Virtues, rather, are acquired. This is no small matter. In the first line of Plato's *Meno*, Meno asks Socrates a question that moral philosophers have continued to try to answer for the last 2,400 years. He asks "whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice; or if neither by teaching nor practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"[@plato, *Meno* 70a] MacIntyre's answer is not that virtue is a gift of the gods, but that it is *acquired.* A recent volume edited by Mark Alfano[@alfano2015current] discusses the range of which positive traits count as virtues. MacIntyre, it would seem, sides with those who limit the range to exclude inborn or genetically determined qualities like a good memory or excellent eyesight from being considered virtues. That is not to say that virtues are *not natural*. In one sense of the word 'natural', virtues are proper to human beings without being, so to speak, "automatic." In this, he agrees with Aristotle that virtue is *in accordance with* nature but not *by nature*.  Rather, virtuous traits are a "normal" psychological outgrowth of cultivating excellence within particular human practices. 

Thirdly, virtues enable their possessor to achieve particular *goods.* This clause assumes that virtues are beneficial. A virtuous trait *cannot* be directed at achieving ills. This assumption will bring some trouble for MacIntyre's initial definition in *After Virtue*. Can't overall wicked people have particular virtues? Can't the thief be courageous, the dictator magnanimous, the glutton affable? It certainly seems that the answer is yes. Even indexing virtues to practices does not solve the problem; can practices be wicked? I shall discuss this problem in next sub-sections.

Fourthly, since virtues "enable their possessor to achieve ... goods", it may seem that virtue are mere *instruments* to goods, not goods themselves. A grave misunderstanding lurks in the vicinity. Virtues *are* instrumental for MacIntyre, but they are not *merely* instrumental. They are both instrumental (to the achievement of certain goods) and also *partly constitutive of those goods.* Virtues are both means to an end and also ends in themselves.^[*Phronesis* or practical wisdom, for example, enables agents to make good decisions that result in human flourishing but having *phronesis* *just is part of what it means* to flourish qua human.] Now, this conflation of means and ends is liable to worry some critics. The worry is not trivial; however, for the sake of completing my presentation of virtue, I must set it aside for now.

MacIntyre's philosophical methodology is exemplified in how he defines ‘virtue’. He begins with Homeric virtues (roughly, the performance of one’s social role) and works through the implicit or explicit definitions of virtue in Plato, Aristotle, the Greek tragic poets, the New Testament, Aquinas, Jane Austen, and Benjamin Franklin. While respecting the different definitions and examples, he creatively abstracts an account that unifies them all. His definition is historical but not restricted to history; it aims to be universal but does not pretend to be purely abstract. His concept of virtue is, rather, *traditional*. Furthermore, as we shall see, MacIntyre's view of 'tradition' is not conservative but progressive, not oriented toward the past but the future. 

### First Stage: Practice ###

What are "*practices*"? Practice is a key term of art; to misunderstand it would be to misunderstand MacIntyre. A practice is a social activity aimed at defined ends. (We commonly speak of "practicing" medicine in this sense.) MacIntyre mentions farming, chess, and political activity, among other examples.  A practice is not merely a reflexive action (like scratching an itch) nor merely a single, discrete, intelligible action (like pulling a weed); it is an intelligible set of actions. The farmer is engaged in a series of activities, from tilling, sowing, watering, protecting, harvesting, storing, etc., all of which are embedded within a social context and organized around a particular goal. Each practice has a history, a set of practitioners, a common set of standards, and a common goal. And virtues are those qualities that enable their possessor to excel in practices. 

For example, secondary school education is a social activity that teachers undertake in order to give children the basic knowledge and skills they need to transition to functional adults in society, whether by getting a job, starting a business, or advancing to higher stages of education.^[Secondary education has other (perhaps de facto) purposes, like to socialize young people in a community of peers and authorities, and to afford them opportunities for recreation, art, clubs, to give parents a break, and so on. For the sake of simplicity, I shall focus on what seems to me the primary goal of education, which is education (in knowledge) and training (in skills) needed for becoming a legal adult.]  Secondary education in the U.S. is a practice with a history (or a set of histories) from the present time back to when Americans completing high school (rather than beginning work on a farm or in town by the age of 16) was the exception rather than the rule. It has standards, both legal standards and "best practices" passed from mentor to student teacher. It pretty obviously has standards of excellence according to which most educators are average, some poor, and some excellent. An educator who wants to join that profession will be enculturated with that history, taught those standards, and given a chance (usually by trial and error) to become a good teacher. 

Leading MacIntyre scholar, Christopher Lutz, highlights four aspects of MacIntyre's famous definition of practice. A practice is: 

>[1] a complex social activity that [2] enables participants to gain goods internal to the practice. [3] Participants achieve excellence in practices by gaining the internal goods. When participants achieve excellence, [4] the social understandings of excellence in the practice, of the goods of the practice, and of the possibility of achieving excellence in the practice are systematically extended.[@lutz2015] 

I believe my example of high school education illustrates Lutz' explication of MacIntyre's definition of 'practice.' [1] Practices are inherently complex *social* activities in that teachers cannot be teachers without students, and (usually) do not teach in isolation but in community with colleagues and administrators and parents. [2] Secondary education qua practice enables teachers to gain the goods "internal to the practice", namely students who are educated enough to be ready for legal adulthood -- for a job or college. [3] Good teachers are those that demonstrate the ability reliably to produce, against all odds, educated students. And [4] good schools and good teachers usually have a *history* and social context that is being "extended" across generations. Good schools recruit and train good teachers, good teachers train the next generation of good teachers, and so on. 

Also, he defines virtues with reference to goods *"internal to"* practices. What is the internal/external relation doing? MacIntyre later refashions the contrast between 'internal' and 'external' goods into one between 'goods of excellence' and 'goods of effectiveness.' I prefer the latter terminology. But the point is, I think, clear. The goods of excellence just are those that necessarily contribute to success within a given practice as such. In secondary education, success is defined by graduate rates, student retention of information, high test scores, high acceptance rates to top colleges, low drug use, low teenage pregnancy, and so on. The profession-specific virtues needed include understanding (to stay patient with struggling students), affability (to keep rapport), articulateness (to present material effectively), and so on. More general virtues needed include honesty, integrity, courage, faithfulness, and so on. Without these, *teaching* may be possible but *teaching well* is impossible. 

By contrast, goods of effectiveness are those that might fit with the practice but are not *necessary* for achieving the end of that practice: high pay, an excellent teacher lounge, a short commute to work, and so on. Mere efficiency in attaining such external goods does not entail the presence of a virtue. In fact, the desire to pursue such goods *instead of* the goods of excellence is not a neutral desire — it is a *temptation.* Virtues are needed to overcome those temptations and to succeed according to the standards of the practice itself.^[To illustrate the temptation goods of effectiveness might pose, we need only think about political activity. Some (I suppose) become politicians *in order to bring about* the survival, security, and prosperity of the *polis*; others engage in order merely to satisfy their own ambition or achieve fame. Often we see American politicians running for office only one apparent aim: book sales.]

### Second Stage: Whole Life

The second stage depends on the notions of a complete human life, the sum of all the practices of one’s life.[@macintyre1984after, chapter 15] He says that "without an overriding conception of the *telos* of a whole human life, conceived as a unity, our conception of certain individual virtues has to remain partial and incomplete."[@macintyre1984after 202] The example given shows how justice demands an ordering of the various goods of excellence within each practice. MacIntyre undermines the notion that the virtues which enable success in practices can be sufficient for an account of virtue in general. He argues that we need to "envisage each human life as a whole, as a unity, whose character provides the virutes with an adequate *telos*."[@macintyre1984after 204] 

Despite the obstacles to such a vision, it is possible. The obstacles MacIntyre cites are both "social and philosophical." The social obstacle is the fragmentation of modern life: "work is divided from leisure, private life from public, the corporate from the personal. So both childhood and old age have been wrenched away from the rest of human life and made over into distinct realms."[@macintyre1984after 204] Just as the temporal segments of life are fragmented into bits (one thinks of the inherently patronizing talk of "senior citizens" compared from the older, inherently reverent talk of "elders"), so also the various projects and pursuits of life are partitioned, labelled, and cordoned off. On this fragmented view of life, the self's social roles are so many conventions masking the "true" underlying nature of the self. This presents a puzzle: how could virtues arise to the level of excellent dispositions for *humans as such*? They would have to be dispositions applicable in personal, private, business, spheres, in young and middle and old age, etc. 

The second and philosophical obstacle is the tendency to atomize "complex actions... in terms of simple components."[@macintyre1984after 204] MacIntyre's argument here is highly significant. He begins by analyzing the way we might answer a simple question such as: "what is he doing?" 

>One and the same segment of human behavior may be correctly characterized in a number of different ways. To the question 'What is he doing?' the answers may with equal truth and appropriateness be 'Digging', 'Gardening', 'Taking exercise', 'Preparing for winter' or 'Pleasing his wife'.[@macintyre1984after 206] 

The first fact to notice is that each of these answers picks out different aspects of the agent's action: intentions, intended consequences, unintended consequences, etc. And, importantly, each of these answers places the simple atomic action within a narrative history: situated in an "annual cycle of domestic activity", in a hobby, in a marriage, and so on -- each with its own history and "setting." The second fact to notice is that the answers to a similarly simple question "Why is he writing a sentence?" might be situated in different time horizons: immediately, he is writing to finish his book; but also he is contributing to a philosophical debate; but also he is trying to get tenure.[@macintyre1984after 207] The upshot of these reflections is that individual actions, abstracted from their context are only intelligible if they are "ordered both causally and temporally... the correct identification of the agent's beliefs will be an essential constituent of this task."[@macintyre1984after 208] MacIntyre's astonishing conclusion from these innocuous premises is that "there is no such thing as 'behavior', to be identified prior to and independently of intentions, beliefs and settings... Narrative history of a certain kind turns out to be the basic and essential genre for the characterization of human actions."[@macintyre1984after 208]

This argument builds to a conclusion that Stanley Hauerwas asserts is "the central contention in After Virtue is his remark that “the concept of an intelligible action is a more fundamental concept than that of an action.”[@macintyre1984after 209] 

Hauerwas continues: 

> This may seem a small philosophical point, but much revolves around it: His understandings of the centrality of practical reason, the significance of the body for agency, why the teleological character of our lives must be displayed through narrative, the character of rationality, the nature of the virtues, why training in a craft is paradigmatic of learning to think as well as live, his understanding of why the Enlightenment project had to fail, his particular way of being a historicist, and why the plain person is the necessary subject of philosophy.[@hauerwas2007]

Actions such as practicioners perform in practices find their intelligibility not only in practices but in the narrative of a whole human life. The same is true for verbal contributions to a conversation. Each turn people take in speaking to each other contributes to an unfolding narrative with a history and a *telos*, without which statements are random and unintelligible. MacIntyre continues:

>But if this is true of conversations, it is true also mutatis mutandis of bat- tles, chess games, courtships, philosophy seminars, families at the dinner table, businessmen negotiating contracts- that is, of human transactions in general. For conversation, understood widely enough, is the form of human transactions in general. Conversational behavior is not a special sort or aspect of human behavior, even though the forms of language-using and of human life are such that the deeds of others speak for them as much as do their words. For that is possible only because they are the deeds of those who have words.[@macintyre1984after 211]

MacIntyre's discussion of narrative is highly interesting but can be left aside.^[Consider such fascinating statements as: "man is in his actions and practice, as well as in his fictions, essentially a story-telling animal. He is not essentially, but becomes through his history, a teller of stories that aspire to truth. But the key question for men is not about their own authorship; I can only answer the question 'What am I to do?' if I can answer the prior question 'Of what story or stories do I find myself a part?'"] For we have arrived at a the supports needed for building the second stage of his account of virtue: the unity of many practices into a single whole. He says: "The unity of a human life is the unity of a narrative quest."[@macintyre1984after 219]

Naturally, to be on a quest is to strive for a goal, even if one fails to reach the goal. The goal, he says, is to quest for "*the* good" (as one understands it at the beginning of the quest). But the conception of *the* good can grow or morph along the way. How do the virtues relate to this quest? 

>"The virtues therefore are to be understood as those dispositions which will not only sustain practices and enable us to achieve the goods internal to practices. but which will also sustain us in the relevant kind of quest for the good. by enabling us to overcome the harms, dangers, temptations and distractions which we encounter, and which will furnish us with increasing self-knowledge and increasing knowledge of the good. The catalogue of the virtues will therefore include the virtues required to sustain the kind of households and the kind of political communities in which men and women can seek for the good together and the virtues necessary for philosophical enquiry about the character of the good."[@macintyre1984after 220]

Virtues "sustain" practices from normal temptations; but virtues also help us to coordinate various practices and pursuits into a coherent quest to live our lives well. Virtues also sustain the relationships with friends, family, fellow citizens, and strangers within which we pursue our goal. 

### Third stage: Tradition

MacIntyre's third stage of his virtue account situates what has come before in a broader social and historical context. That context he simply calls 'tradition.' In MacIntyre's account, we must be careful not to import our various connotations and prejudices for or against 'tradition'.  

>We are apt to be misled here by the ideological uses to which the concept of a tradition has been put by conservative political theorists. Characteristically such theorists have followed Burke in contrasting tradition with reason and the stability of tradition with conflict. Both contrasts obfuscate.[@macintyre1984after 222]

Rather, a tradition is a something like a culture: "A living tradition then is an historically extended, socially embodied argument". 

>Lack of justice, lack of truthfulness. lack of courage. lack of the relevant intellectual virtues--these corrupt traditions, just as they do those institutions and practices which derive their life from the traditions of which they are the contemporary embodiments. 

While we shall pick up MacIntyre's highly contentious concept of tradition in a later chapter, here it will be worth underscoring a few key points. 

Tradition is not a panacea against political tension and turmoil. Quite the contrary: political tensions of a particular character and expression are instrinsic to MacIntyre tradition. As he defines tradition, the internal conflict is a necessary feature: "A living tradition then is an historically extended, socially embodied argument, and an argument precisely in part about the goods which constitute that tradition."[@macintyre1984after 222] 

Nor is tradition a rival to reason and critical reflection. Rather, one learns to reason -- to critically reflect -- within a MacIntyrean tradition. It is a truism that one learns language within a culture. It is equally true that one learns facts and methods of reasoning within a tradition, conceived as a community of thinkers who share not only a common tongue but common concepts and a repertoire of facts, beliefs, customs, etc. So, rather than tradition being opposed to reason, tradition is the first source of our reasoning. And rather than tradition being opposed to critical reflection, tradition is the first source of the habit of critically reflecting. The very ability to expand the repertoire of facts or modify the methods of thinking depends upon the awareness that one inhabits a tradition. This awareness MacIntyre even elevates to the level of a virtue, saying it is "one whose importance is perhaps most obvious when it is least present." What is that virtue?

>the virtue of having an adequate sense of the traditions to which one belongs or which confront one. This virtue is not to be confused with any form of conservative antiquarianism; I am not praising those who choose the conventional conservative role of *laudator temporis act*;. It is rather the case that an adequate sense of tradition manifests itself in a grasp of those future possibilities which the past has made available to the present. Living traditions, just because they continue a not-yet-completed narrative, confront a future whose determinate and determinable character, so far as it possesses any, derives from the past.[@macintyre1984after 223]

This is all we shall say about tradition here. But we must return to it in a later chapter. For MacIntyre, rationality itself is tradition-constituted.  So insofar as practical rationality is the differentium of human nature, and insofar as virtues all depend for their effective operation on the coordinating management of practical reason, tradition will again become an essential concept. 

Virtues are qualities that enable the health and persistence of traditions. A tradition is an extended argument, in part about the goods that constitute that tradition and the terms of that argument. Virtues as related to practices are individual but not individualistic, since practices themselves are social activities. Virtues as related to the whole of life are cultural but not culturally relativistic, for every culture ought to provide for its members some minimal goods. 


## Compare, Contrast, Synthesize

What MacIntyre is missing is a full account of humanity as not just a social being but a biological being. We are animals. We are rational animals but animals just the same. Similarly, McDowell is missing a clear accounting of the relation between second nature and nature. (Rationality will be the main theme in a later chapter.) By locating the activity of evaluating solely in human nature's inhabitation of the space of reasons, he has divorced humanity from the world. As Julia Annas summarizes, non-reductive naturalisms risk trivializing moral or normative facts by implausibly cordoning them within humans:"Non-naturalistic accounts of ethical terms assume that their function, prominently their normativity, is something that arises with humans, or is produced by humans, in a way which owes nothing to the nature which we share with other living things."[@annas2005naturalism 12] 

That link is supplied by Foot (and Thompson et. al.) As Julia Annas says: 

>What is so helpful for ethics from this kind of biological naturalism is that we find that the normativity of our ethical discourse is not something which emerges mysteriously with humans and can only be projected back, in an anthropomorphic way, onto trees and their roots. Rather, we find normativity in the realm of living things, plants and animals, already. It is part of the great merit of the work of Philippa Foot and Rosalind Hursthouse to have stressed this point. Like many important philosophical points, it is obvious once pointed out…[@annas2005naturalism]

By arguing (rightly I think) that the moral outlook can only be ratified from *within the moral outlook*, McDowell has cut off a range of reasonable supports to the moral outlook that can be drawn from "outside." We *can* draw from other natural objects (via generics or Aristotelian categoricals) notions such as "health" and "sickness", "exemplary" and "defective". 

At the same time, Foot's account is lacking in some respects that McDowell and MacIntyre can supply. What Foot is missing is an account of human virtue and  rationality in society and tradition. The virtues are not just beneficial to human beings tout court, unmediated by tradition. The human experience unmediated by tradition does not exist. To be a human being is, as McDowell rightly says, to participate in *Bildung*, a process of formation in which a person with language, thoughts, beliefs, desires, evaluative judgments, etc. are (at least initially) the product. 

I would now like to turn to some remaining puzzles or objections about virtue that might make this account of virtue less plausible. 

## How many virtues? 

Virtues are those excellent traits that humans as practical reasoners need to realize our natural telos. And, we have argued, human nature is an intelligibly determinate concept: rational animals. Still, we might wonder how many virtues there are? It seems that our neo-Aristotelian writers vary widely on this point, from one, to a limited set, to a virtually unlimited set. 

Foot (and Geach) takes for examples the four "cardinal" virtues which are delivered by tradition. (Hursthouse also defends the "theological virtue" of hope and Geach defends even a kind of faith as non-theological virtues. Nevertheless, Geach argues that love can only be a religious virtue.)[@hursthouse1998 chapter 11; @geach1977virtues chapter 4.]

McDowell's account makes it seem like there is only one virtue (knowledge). Each individual virtue is “a sort of perceptual capacity”, a “specialized sensitivity” to a particular range of reasons for action (say, the feelings of others), and all virtue is sensitivity to reasons. There is only one "moral outlook."[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] 

MacIntyre, by contrast, not only includes in his broad historical list the virtues of Homer, Plato, Aristotle, the Greek tragic poets, the New Testament, Aquinas, Jane Austen, Benjamin Franklin, and Jane Austin, but he adds (apparently ad lib) new virtues like "integrity or constancy"[@macintyre1984after 203. "There is at least one virtue recognized by the [Aristotelian] tradition which cannot be specified at all except with reference to the wholeness of a human life -- the virtue of integrity or constancy."] and "an adequate sense of tradition"[@macintyre1984after 223] 

Aristotle's list of virtues includes twelve moral virtues.^[1. Courage in the face of fear; 2. Temperence in the face of pleasure and pain; 3. Liberality with wealth and possessions; 4. Mangifience with great wealth and possessions; 5. Magnanimity with great honor; 6. Proper ambition with normal honors; 7. Patience in the face of irritation; 8. Truthfulness with self-expression; 
9. Wittiness in conversation; 10. Friendliness in social conduct; 11. Modesty in the face of shame or shamelessness; 12. Righteous indignation. He adds five intellectual virtues.] He builds into the definition of some of the virtues (e.g., magnanimity) the notion that not *all* human beings as such require it (since not all are extremely wealthy public servants). 

Is there any sense to be made here? If human nature is stable, yet human reason is flexible enough to admit of variation (both progressive and regressive), then we ought to expect a stable set of qualities that count as virtues that is flexible enough to admit of variation. 

The ‘cardinal’ or classical virtues to which those in the Aristotelian tradition (including recent neo-Aristotelians) give preeminent place are courage, justice, moderation, and practical wisdom. The four cardinal virtues are not only "delivered by tradition" but can be most easily ratified by anyone willing to do the critical analysis. 

Roughly, justice is every member of the community doing their business and each person giving and receiving his due. Since every human being exists in society, the presence or absence of justice in the members of the community will sustain or destroy that community. 

Courage is the proper boldness in doing the right thing despite opposition. Courage is not simply a military virtue appropriate to police officers, firefighters, telephone wire repairmen, etc. 

Moderation is pursuing the right amount of pleasure in the right way at the right time, and avoiding the wrong amount and the wrong way and the wrong time. The dangers to health and happiness of excessive pleasure are obvious to anyone who has had the (mis)fortune to earn or inherit enough time and money to overindulge. Many celebrities who have worked their way to the top of the entertainment industry find that they 

Practical wisdom is excellence in knowing what to do in a given situation.Practical wisdom is I think rightly the most important virtue in the sense that it is a hub from which the other virtues emerge as spokes. Even the theroetical or intellectual virtues Zagzebski writes about[@zagzebski1996virtues] depend for their cultivation on a person willing to invest the time and energy into theoretical learning. But I shall return to this theme in a later chapter. 

Beyond these, our definition of virtue is flexible enough to include a variety of positive character traits. Strictly speaking, however, the core virtues are those *all human beings need* since they benefit people along the lowest common denominator. We might call 'virtues' those positive traits that are appropriate for various life stations, ages, genders, professions, social roles, and so on. But if we are being strict such traits (regardless of how we label them) will be sharply distinguished from the cardinal virtues.  They are the base of a triangle. 

## Are virtues inborn?

These qualities are acquirable. Not everyone has equal opportunity to acquire them — moral education is helpful; virtuous parents and teachers are helpful; social conditions wherein vice will not be gratuitously rewarded or virtues gratuitously punished are helpful. Yet every human being has equal responsibility to acquire them. 

They are, it seems necessary for success in any worthwhile human endeavor. Most people in the world will not write books or even read many books; however, every human being in the world has biological parents and hence has family. Every living human being belongs to a community; even orphans and street urchins live in a community. 

## Is the pursuit of virtue egoistic? 

Supposing that virtues *benefit their possessor*, is it then egoistic or selfish to pursue virtue? Although it seems we only need virtue if we want to be happy, everyone has an obligation to develop virtuous traits because virtues help us become who we are. Such a pursuit is not selfish in the pejorative sense of the word; it is not 'egoism' for the charge of egoism assumes that the good for men is not *the good* per se. 



## Questions for future chapters

The remaining questions about virtue must be pursued in future chapters. I would like to queue them up here. 



### What is human flourishing? 

Virtues effect human flourishing. So what is human flourishing? 

Although it seems to be merely pleasure or worldly success, and though I shall define it more later, I mean generally "well-being", true happiness, human success as such.  


### Are the virtues human or cultural? 

Virtues must be derived from human nature and exemplify excellence in human nature. But still must all such human actions and excellence be mediated by culture, by "second nature"? 

Although it seems they are cultural, they are 'human traits' in that they express human nature. MacIntyre does not basis virtue enough in metaphysical biology; Foot bases it too much in metaphysical biology; McDowell bases virtue in reason but does not explain the relation of reason to metaphysical biology. Foot is closest to my view, but I supplement her view with arguments to the effect that normativity (including teleology) is built-in to nature as a whole, not just humanity. 

      This is a point we attempted to justify in the foregoing chapter. And we shall return to it in the discussion of practical rationality. 

### Can virtues be put to bad use? 

Virtues are necessarily good for human beings as such. But some of the qualities the moral tradition picks out as virtues can be conceived as being put to bad use. So can virtues remain virtues while in bad use? 

Although it seems that virtuous traits cannot be put to bad use, some virtues admit of misuse since the absence of practical wisdom renders traits (like moderation) that really are virtues ineffective at the realization of our human *telos*. 

This will require a discussion of practical wisdom. 

### Can the virtuous person be irrational? 

Relatedly, virtues are supposed to be actions "in accord" with reason and in accord with human nature. This suggests that the virtuous person cannot be irrational. 

Although it seems that the virtuous person can be irrational, the virtuous person is by definition rational either (in the primary sense) by reflectively endorsing their own reasons for action in every or almost every significant life pursuit or (in a derivative but no less real sense) by acting in accordance with good reasons, either on good advice from another or on their own, unreflective, habitual, reasons. 

Practical wisdom, then, has pride of place. There are other virtues besides practical wisdom; Socrates was wrong there. And Maggie Little is wrong to suggest that virtue is knowledge *and nothing more*.[@little2007virtue. It is not totally clear to me from this essay whether she means to suggest this point or not; but the suggestion is there and she does nothing to counteract it.] But it is correct that wisdom has pride of place. Courage without wisdom ceases even to be courage. 

This will also require a discussion of practical wisdom. 