**A Dissertation Proposal**
Keith Buhler
2016 Spring

**The Point of Morality: Virtue, Reason, and Happiness in Recent Neo-Aristotelian Naturalists**

## Introduction

Alasdair MacIntyre has argued that an ethical system must contain three elements: a conception of human nature as it is currently, a conception of the telos or  destination that can and should be realized, and some conception of which qualities or actions that proceeds from human nature to that telos. The three components are, quite simply, a starting point, an end, and means to that end. Without any of these components, he argued quite persuasively that a practical discipline like morality stultifies. Rules and virtues without an end are mere legalism; we can't imagine even going shopping with a list of groceries we "should" buy without a clear conception of the dinner to be cooked. MacIntyre's powerful critique of modern morality in *After Virtue* is that when it errs it errs in precisely this respect: it abandons telos. 

Several contemporary philosophers have attempted to remedy this theoretical defect. Many of them are virtue ethicists. The reason for this is, I think, that the Aristotelian tradition is uniquely situated to construct an ethical system including all three elements. 

For Aristotle himself, humans were rational animals with a particular psychology and set of potentialities, including the endowment of divine nous; our species-wide telos was happiness or eudaimonia. A life of virtuous activity was the means to eudaimonia, and detailed information about the virtues -- both moral and intellectual -- were knowable from tradition and ratified or modified by reflecting on the lives of virtuous Athenien citizens. For "neo-Aristotelians" like John McDowell, Philippa Foot, Alasdair MacIntyre, and others, some aspects of Aristotle's three-fold system are correct as is, some need revising and updating, while others need throwing out. 

In particular, questions about normativity and naturalism plague the neo-Aristotelians. James Lenman worries that McDowell's theory is not "naturalistic" but "neo-Kantian."[@sepmoralnaturalism] Rehg worries similarly about Foot.[@rehg2003conceptual] Is happiness simply a natural state, like health or pleasure? And if so, are the means to that end discernable through statistical analysis of causal relations between acts and their consequences?  Along different lines, teleology it seems is inherently normative. The acorn ought to become an oak tree. Is there any comparison to be made between creatures like snails and oaks who cannot reflect upon and direct their own destinies and us, who can? How do various neo-Aristotelians conceive of humanity, the virtues which are humanity in a state of excellence, and teleology? These are the difficult issues I intend to raise, discuss, and answer in my dissertation. 

## Governing Question and Methodology

Although many books and articles have been written on these authors' views of virtue, practical reason and human nature, or happiness, I would like to focus these chapters on the dynamic relation between the three. Coordinating all three concepts into a coherent system requires sensitivity to what slight changes in one concept might have on the others. A slight change in the intended meal will affect the recipe. 

**Governing question:** How many evaluative truths can one learn (about virtues and vices, practical wisdom, etc.) by examining human nature, including our rationality and possibly our natural teleology? 

The question as written captures all three of MacIntyre's components: in light of best scientific and philosophical evidence, we ought to be able to come up with a tentative conception of human nature; the possible natural teleological facts about us will give us a conception of our goal; and from these we ought to be able to learn at least some truths about which virtuous and vicious qualities enable the realization of the goal. 

Furthermore, many virtue ethicists (MacIntyre, Foot, Mcdowell, but also Annas, Thompson, Brown, and Hursthouse) address some or all of these three components. The richness of literature on these themes promises illuminating comparisons and contrasts.

## (Tentative) Thesis

My governing question is how far ethical truths can be derived from human nature. This dissertation defends a rather optimistic answer to the question: The right way(s) to live is to acquire virtue, especially wisdom. This can be known -- in large part -- by examining what human beings are and what they are for. And we can infer some evaluative truths from some natural facts. Put differently, this dissertation defense the thesis that some evaluative judgments -- such as that 'virtues are beneficial for humans' and that 'wisdom is a virtue' -- true and can be known to be true by examining human nature, which is practical, rational animals.

This thesis is, at present, admittedly vague. Some of these terms are ambiguous enough that using them risks speeding over important controversies. In order to slow down and carefully parse out the relation between virtue, human nature, and happiness, each of the three theorists mentioned above (MacIntyre, Foot, McDowell) will receive a full treatment. Their sometimes conflicting views of virtue will be put into conversation in chapter one; their views of human nature and rationality in chapter 2; their views of happiness or eudaimonia in chapter three. Within each chapter I will assess their views, identify possible inadequacies, and propose more adequate conceptions in order to build toward my own view. Chapter four coordinates the conclusions of the previous chapters, and sharpens the above-stated thesis. It also follows up two significant corollaries to the main thesis. If true, this thesis has a couple of significant consequences. The first is that divine commands are not *necessary* for the discovery of and justification of at least these moral judgments. In one sense, it is possible to be morally good (read: virtuous and practically wise) whether or not one has correct beliefs about God. The second significant consequence is that some iteration of naturalism is correct. I construe 'naturalism' very broadly, as a set of doctrines and methods reflecting on what is natural including human nature -- but then again, 'naturalism' is so multiply ambiguous this may not be a significant consequence after all. Both of these entailments deserve comment. Each, in fact, receives a chapter below. 

## Outline of Chapters

At present, the defense of my thesis and exploration of my key authors takes the form of the following Chapters.

1. Introduction
2. Virtue as Necessary
3. Virtue as Practical Reason
4. Virtue as Constituive of Teleology
5. Virtue, Nature, and God
6. Conclusion

While the first and last chapters coordinate the three main themes, each intervening chapter shakes down some important contemporary virtue ethical thinking on that theme. 

**Virtue: Chapter 1** will provide an primary ethical argument that the virtues are necessary for man as such (using man of course in its gender inclusive sense). By 'the virtues' I mean at least justice, courage, moderation, and practical wisdom -- but possibly more. And by 'necessary' I mean *necessary for* human flourishing. I shall define human flourishing more exactly in a later chapter; I mean to gesture at human well-being, true happiness, human success as such, etc. all of which I take to be virtually synonymous and all of which I will certainly treat here as synonymous. Put negatively, the thesis of this chapter is that vices necessarily contribute to misery, unhappiness, and human stultification and stagnation. Human nature is the starting point, flourishing is the goal, and the moral and intellectual virtues are the means by which we move from start to goal. The remaining chapters address objections to this primary thesis. 

**Practical Reason: Chapter 2** defends one of the core assumptions of the case that virtues are necessary for man: namely, that there is such a thing as human nature. Man has a nature that is discernible; his nature is that of practical rational animals. Wisdom is, therefore, the supreme virtue necessary for human flourishing. Chapter 2 defends this thought against objections from Darwinism from metaphysical skepticism of a certain sort, that there is no human nature, or that if there is, that it is "a mess," or that I even if it's there is, we cannot know what it is. All of which if they were true would render impossible the kinds of moral judgments based on human nature. Chapter 2 also defends the form of naturalism that will be at stake here, namely one in which (in important ways) nature includes normativity, and normativity is natural. The specter of the naturalistic fallacy is flushed from its hiding place and exorcised.

**Happiness: Chapter 3** defends a particular conception of happiness. Namely, happiness is the natural *telos* of humans as such. The thesis that human nature even exists has already been argued. But it is a view of human nature that depends on, and supports, teleological realism about biology. I distinguish between destiny (which is inevitable and determined) and destination (which is not inevitable and not determined). Health, wealth, and reproduction are goals of most people in most places at most times. But Happiness with a capital "H" is the implicit destination of humanity as a species. A conception of happiness  both in this world definitely and potentially beyond this world. But if there is no beyond, the happiness does not even change. 

**Nature: Chapter 4** cleans up some various objections. As paradoxical as it may seem, I anticipate that the objections will be from two quarters: first, that my view is too "naturalistic", or not naturalistic enough for some readers; and second, that my view is to too secular, or not secular enough. I take each of these potential worries in turn. First, I argue that 'naturalism' as it very often appears in our philosophical literature is virtually useless. My position will inevitably be characterized by some friends and foes as a form of naturalism. However, to say naturalism is correct is about as meaningful as to say that empires are Imperial. For many philosophers, naturalism is defined in tautologous terms. So unimportant task will be to shakedown one of our vaguest and most useless philosophical bagaboos. 'Naturalism', weather a weapon or term of endearment, is fatally vague, admitting of no less than 16 substantive distinct and sometimes incompatible positions. My thesis that evaluative judgments can be discerned from examining human nature is commonly labeled 'neo-Aristotelian naturalism', but I am comfortable with the label 'neo-Stoic naturalism', 'natural law', simple 'naturalism,' and I am comfortable throwing out the label altogether in favor of a restatement of the core thesis. Secondly, I address objections from theists who might worry that my thesis is an affirmative answer to the question can one be good without God. Now, divine commands maybe sufficient to make known and to justify true evaluative judgments, but they're not *necessary*. And there maybe other, perhaps more specific moral judgments, moral truths, for which thorough exploration of our human nature and reflection are not adequate and for which divine commands are necessary. So it is no counterexample to my thesis that say God commands Abraham to sacrifice his son Isaac and that no earthly wisdom would have revealed to Abraham but that was the thing to do at that moment. It would be a counterexample to my thesis that say some cultures in history did not know that (say) *honesty was a virtue* until a divine command revealed this basic moral truth to them.

## Why does it matter? 

The first reason why any ethical discussion matters is, of course, that ethics is part of the business of living well. And living well is, perhaps by definition, the only thing worth doing. 

However, there are several more mundane and academic reasons this investigation is worthwhile. The ongoing debates in metaethics over moral naturalism concern whether and how far moral properties can be identified with natural properties. My thesis bears obvious relevance to these debates. 

Furthermore, although virtue ethics has made a recent comeback, virtue ethicists have not yet come to consensus on a definition of virtue let alone a definition of or valuation of eudaimonia. In my view, part of the cacophany is due to a failure to coordinate the two concepts in complete ethical system. 

## Conclusion

This dissertation attempts a positive contribution to recent virtue ethics by offering a scheme that clearly aligns practical rationality, virtue, and natural teleology. But it is part of a larger inquiry into ethics based on, or related to the metaphysics of human nature and philosophy of mind. 