

### Three alternatives to natural normativity (if not included elsewhere)

1. **Nature is purely descriptive, normativity is illusory.** Bald nature is a realm of pure, descriptive fact.^[John McDowell calls this kind of naturalism ‘neo-Humean naturalism’ (*Mind, Values, Reality*, 183, 194) or ‘empiricistic naturalism’, ‘bald naturalism’,  ‘naturalism of the realm of law’ or ‘naturalism of disenchanted nature’.] The problem with this picture is that human beings would not be natural. The other side of the same coin is the view that normativity, whatever it is, is not natural.[@shafer2003moralrealism offers an argument that moral properties are "non-natural" in that they can be known without empirical help, but "natural" in that they are perhaps always realized in the physical, natural world.] But then again, human beings would not be natural if we are in any sense irreducibly normative. For normativity is central to human consciousness and value, and perhaps even language and meaning. As Julia Annas puts it: "Non-naturalistic accounts of ethical terms assume that their function, prominently their normativity, is something that arises with humans, or is produced by humans, in a way which owes nothing to the nature which we share with other living things."[@annas2005naturalism 12] If nature cannot include irreducible normativity such as that which is essential to language and morality, surprisingly, it cannot include us. I think we ought to reject any picture of nature or of science that exiles naturalists and scientists. 

2. **Nature is purely descriptive, normativity is reducibly descriptive.** Some zealous defenders of bald nature will be quick to assure me that normativity can and will be one day "reduced" to mere description. Beside the fact that such promises in philosophy of mind have been very long in the fulfilling, I think such assurances are especially misguided in this case. Telling me that normativity is, after all, *really* just descriptivity disguised or mistaken seems to me self-referentially incoherent. It is like arguing that one 'ought' not tell anyone what they 'ought to do.' Of course, arguing that one 'ought not' talk like that is an instance of telling me what I *ought* to do. Similarly, arguing that on best evidence everyone *ought* to believe that normativity is in principle reducible is an instance of appealing to fundamental, irreducible normative considerations about evidence and reasons for belief. To quote Annas again: "it strikes me as ironical that such accounts often arise... From an excessive respect for science. Not only do they cut off our self understanding from the understanding we have of other things, they prevent us from seeing continuities between us and other living things, and in both these ways reveal themselves as profoundly anti-scientific."[@annas2005naturalism 13] Some may choose to wait (perhaps forever) for the promised reductions of the normative to the non-normative. I elect to move on. 

3. **Nature is unknown**. A final alternative, this one more desparate, would be to argue that nature is mysterious and that we cannot know the truth of generic statements. But, such a skeptical move renders us safe from natural normativity but at the cost of endorsing absurdity: isn't it scientific knowledge that penguins are birds, that eyes are adapted for seeing? I'm not sure how to debate someone who seriously would deny such statements. 

4. **Nature is partly descriptive, partly normative.**. 



