### Three Sorts of Ethical Naturalism

Neo-Aristotelians identify moral facts with natural facts about *some* aspect of humanity. As Rosalind Hursthouse says, "Virtue ethics, or at least any form of it that takes its inspiration from Aristotle, is usually taken to be a form of ethical naturalism -- broadly, the enterprise of basing ethics in some way on consideration of human nature, on what is involved with being good *qua* human being."[@hursthouse1998virtue 192] The hope is that if we can say what a *good human being* is, we shall be well on the way to describing what kinds of actions are right and wrong, or what kind of character traits are admirable or blameworthy. 

Even within this general strategy, there are several brands of such neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism: Are the natural facts or properties in question biological properties (Foot), our shared human life form itself (Thompson), shared rationality (McDowell), a characteristic way of life (Hursthouse), or something else? Three sorts concern us here. 

The first is Philippa Foot's.  Foot's sort of neo-Aristotelianism aims to discover that "the status of certain dispositions as virtues should be determined by quite general facts about human beings."[@foot2001natural 45] She goes further than just basing evaluative properties on "considerations of human nature"; she identifies goodness and badness with the *natural properties of organisms in general* (such as health, functionality, and disease). Humans are one type of natural organism, so perhaps morality is one type of natural goodness. 

Jennifer Frey summarizes the "master thought" of Foot's brand of neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism:

>The ethical naturalist’s master thought is this: man needs the virtues just as much as a bee needs its sting. Such a thought is intriguing insofar as it takes the ethereal and elusive ‘moral ought’ and brings it back down to earth, by locating it within a wider structure of evaluation we already readily grasp and acknowledge as objectively valid.[@frey 5]

One of the potential attractions of Foot's type of ethical naturalism is that, by bringing the 'moral ought' into closer contact with empirical disciplines, ethicists can more fully avail themselves of the fruits of modern science. As Joyce points out: "Key contributions can be made [in ethics] by social and developmental psychologists, experimental economists, neuroscientists, geneticists, primatologists, anthropologists, comparative ethologists, and evolutionary biologists."[@joyce2013ethics 1] Mark Murphy calls Foot's hypothesis a type of "secular natural law theory". It aims to apply to ethics natural normative notions such as 'necessity', 'ought', and 'health', which are already in use in biological and other sciences. 

Indeed, although neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism has many rivals, it has proven to have a surprisingly broad appeal. It has appealed not only to philosophers but to specialists in other academic fields, such as sociology, anthropology,[@brown2016configurations] business and accounting,[@west2016ethics] bioethics, public health ethics,[@ortmann2016public] education,[@carr2005virtue] and others. For example, sociologist Amanda Maull summarizing the issue like this: 

>Drawing upon the works of philosophers such as Philippa Foot, Richard Kraut, and Martha Nussbaum, the claim is made that there are moral properties and facts that are natural (rather than occult or supernatural), which are derived from certain innate dispositions and capacities of living things (i.e., those associated with growth and self-maintenance as opposed to destruction or harm). Human beings have evolved as social creatures with special capacities for speech and reason such that specification of “human flourishing” is more complex and problematic than it is for plants or animals. For the human being, the idea of the “good life” goes beyond biological survival and pertains to potentially ambiguous concepts such as virtue, happiness, and “well-being."[@maull2013deweyan 577]

Yet Foot's view is by no means the default view. Certain objections are commonly raised. Stephen Brown summarizes a "charge... frequently levelled at ethical naturalism, *viz.* that it seeks to 'reduce' ethics to something else, perhaps biology, perhaps to something even more 'fundamental' like physics."[@brown2008virtue 5] John McDowell doesn't *quite* accuse Foot of this mistake; nevertheless, he thinks her theory is dangerously close to the kind of mistake that would "biologize" ethical theory, turning *normative* ethics into a merely *empirical* discipline. His criticism of such a mistake is that it falls prey to the "Myth of the Given"^[@mcdowell1996mind. McDowell borrows this phrase from Sellars. Cf. @sellars1956empiricism] -- roughly, the notion that some conceptual content (including ethical norms) can be just *given*, for free, in perceptual experience. 

While criticizing Foot, McDowell is also a neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalist in the narrower sense described above: he thinks moral values are real, yet he denies that they are parts of the empirical world of bald nature and denies that they are part of some other, non-natural realm. What is the alternative? This is the second sort to be discussed. 

For McDowell, moral values are part of the "space of reasons", or "second nature."[@mcdowell1996mind.] "Second nature" is for McDowell our own rational consciousness in so far as it is enculturated by language, custom, evaluation, habit, and a way of seeing the world.^[Compare with Hegel: "The habit of the ethical appears as a second nature which takes the place of the original and purely natural will and is all pervading soul, significance, and actuality of individual existence." @hegelright 195.] McDowell's "second nature" is inherently rational but also social, and depends on our intersubjective "form of life." Hence, values are "secondary qualities" of nature, partially constituted by the mental act of the observer. Human virtue, on this account, is a sort of perceptual sensitivity to "what a situation requires."[@mcdowell1979virtue] One is not perceptually sensitive to a primary natural fact, but to a dispositional property -- a property that is partly natural and partly constituted by the rational appraisal of the moral agent (i.e., "second nature").

McDowell and Foot both lay claim to the title of 'neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism', since neither wishes to completely debunk morality but neither wishes to accept a source that is supernatural or non-natural. 

But, as we can see, McDowell and Foot represent two very different "sorts of naturalism."[@mcdowell1998two; @fink. Both of these articles will be discussed in detail in a later chapter.] These internecine controversies are more than a war of words. A heuristic oversimplification might be that one finds a grounding for real moral values in the context of rationality (that is, the conscious, the subjective, the cultural or intersubjective) while other finds it in a broader context of biological functionality (that is, the physical, the scientific, and the objective).  would be to say that one sort emphasizes biology  while the other sort emphasizes rationality ). Both see the importance of grounding ethical facts in natural facts, but Foot thinks that scientifically accessible natural teleological facts are live candidates; McDowell does not. Putting the contrast in this way highlights the broader implications of this debate. At stake are the very concepts of 'nature', 'science', and 'human nature' which have been thematized in other important philosophical debates in metaphysics, the philosophy of science, philosophical anthropology, and others.

Because of the deep fault lines between Foot and McDowell's sorts of naturalism, other neo-Aristotelians have also weighed in. They have either taken sides or aimed to find a third alternative that synthesizes the other two. For example, Rosalind Hursthouse's landmark monograph, *On Virtue Ethics*, picks and chooses: she builds on Foot's account in many ways, even though she agrees with McDowell in rejecting the search for an "external", objective, scientific foundation for virtue ethics. Alasdair MacIntyre's influential book, *After Virtue*, aligns more with McDowell in rejecting "Aristotle's metaphysical biology", but his later writings align more with Foot in arguing that "human identity is primarily, even if not only, bodily and therefore animal identity and it is by reference to that identity that the continuities of our relationships to others are partly defined."[@macintyre1999dependent 8] 

Between Foot's and McDowell's sorts of ethical naturalism, who has the upper hand? Is there any hope for a "third sort" of naturalism that draws from or synthesizes the other two? Can one unite "second nature" with "primary nature" -- unite, that is, the *rational/cultural/intersubjective* aspect of ethics with the *empirical/biological/objective* aspect of the same? 