{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 \
Naturalist objection clarified\

\b0 This leads to the question of whether ethical norms are 'natural'?  Are moral facts, or what I am calling simply 'norms' natural? This seems like a pressing and substantive question whose answer will affect much. After doing the research for this dissertation, I no longer think it is a pressing or substantive question. It is not just vague but hopelessly vague; not just ambiguous but fatally ambiguous. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://E7D5FC83-2040-45EF-A4CA-0C7BAC71D20B"}}{\fldrslt \cf0 There is a danger that labels, which are useful for categorization, storage, and quick reference of arguments and beliefs, become more important than substantive arguments. }}I take my metaethical view to be a brand of normative realism, emphasizing moral norms but using epistemic norms as allies. I take my normative ethical view to be a brand of virtue ethics. Talk about virtues, human nature, and flourishing or happiness I find the most helpful in solving knotty metaethical puzzles. Sometimes, as Thomas Nagel reminds me, the only solution to metaethical puzzles is to stick to primary ethical tools. \
\
So, what we mean by \'91natural\'92? What we  \'97 friends and foes of metanormative realism \'97 mean by \'91natural\'92? \
* We could mean that values are endemic to human nature, to humans, and that humans are natural. Examples: John McDowell, Philippa Foot.  The core concern here is to save the appearances but respect as much scientism as possible. \
* We could mean that values are features of the natural world just like natural kinds. Example: Richard Boyd. The core concern here is atheism.\
* Values could be natural the way that health is natural and anything that produces health. Example: Paul Bloomfield. The core concern here is humanism.\
* Still others might argue that values are natural that supervene on normal natural facts the same way psychological facts supervene on normal physical facts. Example: Frank Jackson. The core concern here is physicalism.\
\
But the fundamental tension between "inside" and "outside" might itself be a misunderstanding. That seems to be one of John McDowell's main points. \
\
What if the objection from discontinuity or dissonance is misguided? It seems that "science" supports reductive materialist metaphysics but what if our "respect for natural science" demands nothing of the sort? Then the objection against realism weakens. And its inherent plausibility and truly amazing explanatory power shines forth again unabated. \
\
4. Are these norms "natural"?\
	* Are these norms radically anomalous? Are they strange, queer, discontinuous? \
	* Are such norms physical/material? (Nagel, McDowell)\
	* Are such norms divine? \
5. Where do such norms come from? Do they happen to emerge from our biology? Do they come from the mouth of a god? Are they necessary features of our rational nature and other other creatures with a rational nature? \
\
My claim is that: \
\
1. These norms are 'natural' but that the question 'Is X natural?' is almost vacuous. \
	* These norms are not radically anomolous. They are not strange, queer, discontinuous.  (Nagel)\
	* These norms are not material. (Nagel, McDowell)\
	* These norms are not emergent properties arising from our biology. (Foot, Brown)\
5. These norms are internally related to human nature (via practical rationality). (Foot, McDowell, Kant)\
\
For the purpose of these essays, I remain agnostic as to whether these norms come from any particular personal god. But I do claim that they are divine. The contrast is likely to strike the reader as strange. By 'divine' I mean that they transcend our animal biology and that conformity to them makes us rational, acting creatures full of wisdom and virtue.  Affirming the divinity of some norms is consonant with a variety of theistic views: Aristotle's god is neither Brahman nor Jehovah. \
\
But insofar as 'natualist' is just a label for 'atheist,' then my argument entails that naturalism is false. But I deny the charge that my view is "non-naturalistic." Insofar as 'naturalist' is a label for 'one who believes in the radical continuity of facts, the uniformity and harmony of reality,' I vehemently claim the label as my own. In order to claim the label as my own, I must show that they are mistaken who think reality is radically continuous because reality is fundamentally physical or material. \
\
The best evidence that reality is not fundamentally material is human nature, rationality and practical rationality, including primary norms. \
\
Having removed the teeth from the overriding motivation to be "naturalistic", these rival views turn out simply to be half-hearted substitutes for virtue. They are not even properly "rivals" nor are they clear-headed. The clear-headed work to be done is to clarify objections to virtue theory and articulate better answers and explanations. }