{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
I. Moral metaphysics \'97 are moral facts real or not? \'a0Is morality more a matter of taste than truth?\'a0\
	If not, then either constructivism or nihilism. (Mackie)\
	If so, then moral realism (on one taxonomy). (Plato)\
\
II. Are moral facts properly basic, brute facts or based on further foundation \'97 are they \'93stance-independent\'94 or constructed by the persons or groups who judge them?\'a0\
	If stance independent, then moral realism. (Shafer-Landau; Nagel; Wielenburg; Foot?)\'a0\
	If stance-dependent, then moral realism/idealism (McDowell; Hursthouse.)\
		If stance-dependent, do they depend on the person? Relativism. \
		If stance-dependent, do they depend on the society? Cultural relativism. (Harman)\
		If stance-dependent, do they depend on the ideal person? (Hursthouse) \
		If stance-dependent, do they depend on the structure of pure practical reason? (Korsgaard)\
	\
II. Moral epistemology \'97 is moral knowledge possible? And how do we learn about the moral facts, if there are any?\
	If so, by rational intuition the same as mathematic and logical and modal facts? Self-evidence? Moral rationalism (Shafer-Landau) Foot?\
	If so, by empirical knowledge, the same as everyday facts and scientific facts? Moral empiricism (Boyd) Brown?\'a0\
	If so, by special moral intuition? (Audi) \'a0\
	If not, then error-theory.\'a0\
\
III. Moral semantics \'97 do moral terms refer? Are judgments with moral terms as the predicate significant?\'a0\
	If so, then cognitivism.\'a0\
	If not, expressivism.\'a0\
		If expressivism, then either emotivism, prescriptivism, norm-expressivism, etc.\
\
\
IV. Moral naturalism \'97 are real moral facts natural facts?\
	If so, ethical naturalism.\
		If so, are they facts about natural kinds? (Boyd)\
		If so, are they facts about human beings? Railton (Brown)\
		If so, are they facts about humans relation to nature? (Nagel? Foot?)\
	If not, non-naturalism.\'a0\
\
V. Moral motivation and action\'97 are moral reasons necessarily motivating?\
	If so, internalism (?)\
	If not, externalism (Shafer-Landau)\
	Are moral facts normative (rataional) norms? \
	How is it that moral facts set an appropriate standard for our behavior?\'a0\
}