{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ### We are practical reasoners ### \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\i\b \cf0 ### Human virtue as practical reasoning since human nature is practical reason\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\i0\b0 \cf0 As for human nature, human beings are practical reasoners; we are dependent, rational animals. That is what we are. And yes, we have natures. That word and that concept are not out-dated, outmoded, irrelevant, obsolete, unscientific, or any other such slur. Biologically, we are animals evolved from simpler animals.[@macintyre1999dependent x] And we are practical reasoners (more on that below). We are in a position to see how MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue works. We find ourselves in a tradition (or more than one). Within that, we find ourselves engaging in practices. We engage in some of these practices inside, and others outside, institutions. Virtues are those skills that enable us to perform the practice excellently; virtues are also those skills and habits by which we perform various social roles excellently; but finally virtues are those qualities by which we aim our practices toward an excellent human life, and by which we integrate our various social roles toward human ends. For instance, the most general virtuous qualities contribute to the flourishing of human being qua practical reasoner. The practice of practical reasoning is a universal human practice. The \'93human nature\'94 that is universally distributed across each member of our species is the capacity (sometimes unrealized) to become practical reasoners. This  makes sense of why educational institutions (as one example) are so important. Without them, virtues \'97 and the goods open to the virtuous \'97 are liable to remain unavailable to many. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\i \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\i0 \cf0 \
### Phronesis\
\
Prudence or phronesis is the master virtue in that it complements every other moral virtue. MacIntyre defends Aristotle\'92s conception of the practical syllogism wherein the major premise is an evaluative judgment about a virtue or action-type; the minor premise is a truth judgment about a situation or action-token; the conclusion is *an action*. For example, \'93I ought to do (the courageous thing of) resisting a student\'92s attempt to bribe me for a higher grade. This student is attempting to bribe me for a higher grade. Therefore, in this case, I ought to do (the courageous thing of) resisting this student\'92s attempt to bribe me.\'94 Without moral virtues, prudence is simply the knowledge of *what is to be done*. Without prudence, the moral virtues are simply skills or habits that might be serviceable to bad ends; one might be excellent in achieving *what is not be done*. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\i \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\i0 \cf0 ### Practical Reasoners\
\
We are practical reasoners. Observations we can readily make to support this axiom are so abundant it is hard to know where to start: A group of high school students exiting class for lunch stop in the hallway and argue about where to sit; a senate sub-committee convenes to deliberate on whether to pull federal funding from a particular health organization; a U.N. Assembly convenes to deliberate whether to place sanctions on a recalcitrant nation; a philosophy professor chats with the department chair about how to boost the number of majors; a father and mother sip wine, after the kids are in bed, while arguing over the grocery budget. \
\
Each of these situations, I hope, so familiar that my analysis will not (yet!) be controversial. The pattern each instantiates is a group of human beings engaging in practical reason \'97 a community thinking what to do. It is difficult to get out of bed in the morning without engaging in practical reasoning with others. Abduct the principle from the particulars: human beings, us, are practical reasoners in community. We are practical reasoners in communities. \
\
If this is true, the converse would be true: those who are not practical reasoners, or not in community, are not human. Regardless of whether this strikes a false note for the reader, it is at least intelligible. this corollary is the natural extension of the Greek view that exile was on par with, if not worse than, public execution. To remove you from your community is in an important sense to destroy you as a person. A hanging or poisoning only destroys you as a body. An exile is far worse than that. It rips you from your context, tears out from the social fabric the thread that you are. It turns you, while existing, into a non-being, a non-entity, an object. Regardless of whether we can sympathize with this way of thinking about exile, we can understand how one can be demoted from human status. \
\
We should not say that a non-practical-reasoner is not human, but that they fail to be exemplary. Brain-dead, or mentally handicapped, or injured etc., persons are not non-human but they are importantly defective qua humans, as I think common sense can recognize. \
}