{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red52\green52\blue52;\red38\green38\blue38;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\li960\sl280\sa266\qj

\f0\b\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\
body of the paper.
\b0 \'a0 This will standardly include:
\fs26 \cf3 \strokec3 \
\pard\pardeftab720\li1920\sl280\sa266\qj

\fs24 \cf2 \strokec2 (1) a brief exposition of the concepts, positions and arguments you aim to discuss
\fs26 \cf3 \strokec3 \

\fs24 \cf2 \strokec2 (2) your arguments in defense of your thesis
\fs26 \cf3 \strokec3 \

\fs24 \cf2 \strokec2 (3) a discussion of potential objections to your thesis and your responses to those objections.
\fs26 \cf3 \strokec3 \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f1\fs28 \cf0 1. It is possible to express in generic propositions scientific knowledge about the life form and natural teleology of natural organisms. (Scientific realism). And Humans are natural organisms. (Naturalism) Therefore, it is possible to express in generic propositions scientific knowledge about the life form and natural teleology of human beings. (Ethical naturalism)\
2. The second premise is what needs supporting. In other words, evaluating a good human being requires identifying what is characteristic of the species in question. It requires identifying our life form, our nature, the archetype of a human being. The set of "characteristic" features of a human being -- the human life-form or nature -- is expressible in generics. \
3. It is possible to express in generic propositions scientific knowledge about the life form and natural teleology of human beings. \
4. Now, one might object that human nature is variability itself.  \
5. Similarly, one might object that there is no such thing as human nature because there are *no* fixed species or biological natures, or natural kinds. \
6. And one might object that there is no human nature because "natures" belong to lower life forms but not humans. Such animal natures aim at reproduction, not flourishing. \
5. Nevertheless, all humans are (a) animals and (b) practical and rational. \
6. As a generic, the truth of this statement is compatible with variability since variability is a function of practical reason, which is universal. \
7. As a generic or formal truth, the truth of this proposition is compatible with humans failing to become practical or rational due to genetic defect, illness, injury, or injustice. \
10. Let's specify in more detail exactly what is unique about animals with practical reason. \
11. Humans are alive, move, live, grow, reproduce, and die. They have a history, a nature, and a destiny. \
10. Humans *speak*. They talk, engage in symbol use in social contexts.\
11. Humans *act*; that is, they are practical creatures, that self-determine, self-direct, and so on. \
12. Human's *think*; we use terms like 'reason' and ratio as abstractions to describe a set of capacities we notice in ourselves. For example, activities that get called 'rational' are activities such as to observe, perceive as, create, reflect, decide, determine, abstract, infer, explain, deduce, remember, predict, criticize, praise, blame, admonish, and so on. \
6. And one might object that there is no human nature because "natures" belong to lower life forms but not humans. Such animal natures aim at reproduction, not flourishing. \
}