{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red53\green53\blue53;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}}
\deftab560
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\fs24 \cf2 {\listtext	1.	}1.	For atheist version should be for a atheist\
{\listtext	2.	}Exclamation of the two kinds of teleology is just wonky, the Julia Annas that is she go somewhere else. I should explain teleological nihilism to a logical reductionism to illogical realism about biology and teleological realism about society all together.\
{\listtext	3.	}Also are we talking about teleology or forms and teleology? And if the latter shouldn't we be doing form and function instead of tell us?\
{\listtext	4.	}The Thompson section isn't until bad but really drive the point home about life. To be a monist about being requires deferring perhaps and definitely a final reduction of biology to physics.\
{\listtext	5.	}Put Hursthouse and foot quotes ealrier\
{\listtext	6.	}Statement s don't have deductive certainty. Only inferences do. So rephrase that wine from McDowell about generic inferences derive from generic propositions do not mean for and failed to reach to Dr. certainty.\
{\listtext	7.	}Also continue with the 32 teeth analogy. Did you Merrick human beings have 32 teeth doesn't predict for any individual John McDowell. It predicts for the exemplary human being to have 32 teeth. If your dicks it if someone does not have to be 32 teeth it's because they lost one or had one pulled or had a cavity or gotten a fight or have a genetic issue.\
{\listtext	8.	}I like the hemlock tree example. But maybe put it after the Thompson quote. Talk about flowers and bees. And then say bees kinds of examples are myriad. Hemlock trees shade little patches of river and are necessary for the ecosystem of that river. There are more bacteria living on my body then there are birds and beasts in the rain forest. There are an incredible array of bio diverse interdependencies and send biosis, much of which is still being explored by natural scientists, ecologists.\
{\listtext	9.	}Chapter 4. The transition from explaining why I want to include the two kinds of readers with calculated ambiguity to the Hearst house quotation is not good. \
{\listtext	10.	}Grammatical and syntactic properties of the natural language. Instead of grammatical it's a tactic properties.\
{\listtext	11.	}The first is that I should hasten to clarify. Should be the first clarification is that I should Haitian to clarify.\
{\listtext	12.	}Not a problem for some sorts d bro naturalism . This sort of naturalism. Period. Should be not a problem for some sorts of naturalism such as Neil Arista to a naturalism which I have been defending.\
{\listtext	13.	}I think the Thompson quote and Mautner quote repeat twice\
{\listtext	14.	}Rational despair cannot be settled by scientific argument; it would need a philosophical argument. \
{\listtext	15.	}The "unknown nature" or "just animal" objection may have already been addressed at the beginning. \
{\listtext	16.	}Chapter 4, put the objections and responses together; it' just less awkward. \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 # 166 understanding the borderline mother-- story about psychological damage. Might be good to explain what I mean by maturity and full formation and development. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
# Powerful statement from a German news anchor about the silence or relief or rest. It she said it's part of her German identity the Auschwitz. It's a good example of collective identity as McIntyre would have it.awwwa
\f0 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
==== Chapter 4 ====\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0\cf2 # In footnote reword that phrase so it is not a question. Are we born from other humans?\
\
# Put second Hursthouse quotation earlier with foots quote about \
\
# The irrelevance objection repeats it self like seven times. Synthesize and make a comment that this objection is so important to take care to put it in a couple of different ways.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 # The point I take it, chapter 4. Reduce or remove repetition.\
\
# Put the paragraph of examples about we can imagine people doing what comes natural he somewhere else, in the social teleology section maybe?\
\
#Dependence is as close to use "should be dependence is as close to us\
\
# Change transition, and rational or rather the exception, not\
\
# To discuss genetic disorder etc. Should be followed immediately by intentional actualization and just possession of a nature. Dispossession. \
\
# Also delete or relocate the sentence about the old classificatory Schey\
\
# Innocent babies born without brains are still potentially rational since they are human beings, and recognizably so \'96 they are not Eagles or Stardust are weeping Willows. They are simply defective in that brain of the parts of the brain necessary for the actuation of humor human form tragically did not arise. Thankfully we have a clean exclamation for this, and generics the generics are formal true is compatible with individual exceptions. Generics are not crassly empirical statistical universal judgments\
\
# This helps us to rebut a playful job quote should be this helps us to Perry playful Jeff. Use a fencing metaphor. Explain that Russell meant we are driven by emotion, we are often irrational, in that we do things that are not good for us, we do things we know we are not good for us. We are forgetful, we neglect or better angels, etc. Which is all true. That most of us do not actualizer formants is sad but compatible with the truth of the generic. Maybe for instance that political context or natural following this incest real soon keep us from becoming who we truly are.\
\
# Peter singer is someone who is not an evil person but whose philosophical thinking has falling into this mistake. \
\
#Pre born human fetuses... Regardless of the niceties of personhood.\
\
#Rephrase the tragedy bit to say we understand that they are in process mid development etc\
\
#I say this is Fitzpatrick's worry. But that line needs to come before the response.\
\
# Add this in somewhere? >It is widely agreed that a virtue is a trait of character. Michael Slote says that an individual virtue is conceived as \'93an inner trait or disposition of the individual.\'94 Rosalind Hursthouse has attempted to articulate in detail what such a trait would consist in. The key point, in her view, seems to be that a virtue is not merely a disposition to act in certain characteristic ways. To be sure, a virtue does lead one to act in characteristic ways, but beyond this, it leads one to act in such ways for characteristic reasons and in a characteristic manner, to have certain characteristic attitudes and emotions, to be acute in detecting cases in which the virtue is at issue, and so on.[@copp2004morality 516]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf2 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\sa40\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 1. In the evolutioarny no human nature objections in chapter 3, put the responses after each statement of the objection. That will make the discussion flow better. \
2. In the same section, mention that philosophers fall into three camps regarding the relation between evolution and morality: debunkers think the facts of evolution somehow undermine the objective purport of morality; underwriters think that the facts of evolution actually underwrite the objective purport of morality; the third group just denies that evolutionary theory has much to contribute to morality \'97 they are separate domains with their own principles, rules, and standards of justification. They may relate in some way but not in a straightforward relationship of undermining or underwriting one or the other. \
3. Google search and find Lott, Frey, and all the other recent stuff on virtue ethics.\
4. Read Adams and see what I can cull. Probably read Hurka in this connection as well. 
\b \
5. For developments and criticism of Foot's view: 
\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
See Chrisoula Andreou, \'91\'91Getting On In a Varied World,\'92\'92 Social Theory and Practice Vol. 32, 2006 and Candace Volger, \'91\'91Modern Moral Philosophy Again: Isolating the Promulgation Problem,\'92\'92 Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 2006. See also Ron Sandler, \'91\'91What Makes a Character Trait a Virtue?\'92\'92, Journal of Value Inquiry, Vol. 39, Nos. 3\'964 (2005). \
# In chapter 6, change all the McDowell quotations and page numbers from the anthology version to the article or book version. This should only take about 20 minutes. \
# Change all the "I wills" to "I shalls" and "we will" to "we shall"\
# \cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Read Fitzpatrick\
# Maybe I can remove the part about aggressive materialism and how physicalism a satisfying at the very beginning of the dissertation and put it here: \cf0 Perhaps I am being too hard on McDowell, when what he wants to do is show the inadequacies of each view and not replace them. Perhaps he means, in a sense, that 'nature' is an indefinable mystery. Nature is like an enormous box and we don't know its contents. Even then, we cannot exclude *in advance* any hypotheses about what will or will not appear in the box. \cf2 \
\
\
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
=== Havne't done or can't find == \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 # Chapter 4 Aristotleian view should be "he refers to an Aristotelian view."\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 # Chapter 4 Practical reason reason. Try to introduce those together.\
# Chapter 4? The couch  potato relieves himself.\
# Quine science itself teaches blah blah blah-- pick on Quine. @keil2003science\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 # maybe put \'93rise of virtue ethics\'94 sooner? in old introduction\
}