{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green23\blue24;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93To answer this question, Hursthouse utilizes what we might call a \'93thick\'94 notion of rationality. Not only must an individual take the right steps to her ends, but she must also take the right steps toward the right ends. The right ends are, simply, those ends that are natural to creatures like us. To be rational, then, is to act in such a way that one effectively realizes those natural ends.
\fs18 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up10 20 
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 This provides us with an answer to the preceding objection. It is true that individual human beings have a complex system of ends and goals that they consciously pursue. These ends are related to the characteristic ends included in our lifeform either by being identical to those ends or by being ways through which those ends are realized. Of course, if someone were to set goals that conflicted with the ends natural to us, on this view of what counts as rational we would be forced to conclude that that person was behaving irrationally. Moreover, on such a neo-Aristotelian account, the person is also behaving immorally, for to be rational is to be moral. In fact, the terms are more or less synonymous.\'94 (Brown, \'93Really Naturalizing Virtue\'94 p. 9). \
\
To be moral is to be (practically) rational. That is, practical reason is the mood of reason we are talking about, not theoretical or abstract or speculative reason. To be moral is not merely to avoid harming others. To be moral includes doing what makes sense to do, in light of benefiting others, benefiting oneself, doing what is good in every respect and weighing all those respects. To be moral is to be rational 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
practically
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, to act rationally, to live according to reason, to do what is reasonable to do, to always act for good reasons. On this account, to be careless and uncompassionate toward others is immoral but no more or less immoral than to be foolish, or impious (of there is a god), or idle. }