{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ####Telos and Final Cause\
1. Is our final cause survival and reproduction?\
* It seems that it is for survival and reproduction are the final cause of all living things, all organisms on the tree of life.\
* Furthermore the drive for survival, Metabolsis, and reproduction are the only processes that all living things have in common. They are the proper act, the distinctive work, the unique function of living things.\
* The drive for life in humans is stronger then other competing drives, including whatever conscience or moral norms dictate, since most people will do what is dishonorable or wrong to preserve their own lives, or the lives of their genetic kin. \
 * The drive for reproduction, the sex drive, is stronger than even our drive for eating or drinking or other forms of pleasure. Psychologists tell us that males think about sex every eight minutes, or so. Also people will have sex at almost any opportunity. The Olympic Village being an example. Also, people reproduce far beyond the rate that other considerations recommend. The species is rapidly over populating the planet at the expense of other ecosystems, other species, other lifeforms like the rain forest, and even the planets as a whole.\
* On the contrary, Socrates tells the Athenians at his trial to cultivate virtue which is the health of the soul more than the adornment and pleasure of the body. And many other moral exemplars, Saints, and sages tell us that the final cause of humanity as a species are something more then our biological dictates.\
* I answer that our end as the perfection of our nature. In so far as our nature includes but is not limited to our biology, our end includes but is not limited to our biology. Furthermore, occasionally the pursuit of our final cause demands that we ignore or reject or deny the dictates of our biology. As for instance, a parent who is down to her last loaf of bread will suffer hunger herself in order to feed her children. Or a celibate monk who will forgo the pleasures of sex, the biological interest in reproduction, and the joy of child rearing for the sake of the perfection of intellect and heart. \
\
* Plus, Saints just do not talk like that. They talk about serving God, or becoming enlightened, or beholding the truth, or spreading happiness to all. Notice that spreading happiness to all May or may not correspond to maximizing my own personal happiness.\
* Talk about such final causes has seem more likely to be included in the definition of perfecting human nature according to its form is in ennobling. \
* By contrast talk about final causes such as survival and reproduction is morally enervating. People who think and talk like this display also pathological psychologies obsessed with what is merely animal and ignoring or denying or rejecting what is more than animal. \
\
The clearest and best definition of virtue I have ever heard is still the simplest. The first definition I heard it's still the clearest invest.\
\
The virtue of X is a property of X that makes it F well, where F is its proper function, it's proper work, or achieving its final cause, attaining to its telos, actualizing the potential inherent to its form. A virtue of a knife is that property of a knife that makes it cut well. Knives are supposed to cut, that is what they are for, cutting and occasionally stabbing are its final causes, it's proper function. And so the virtues of knives is at least: being sharp, being durable enough and hard enough to cut through matter softer than itself, and depending on the knife a serrated edge or a sharp point. There are a variety of species of knife, who's functions display a variety of species of cutting and or stabbing. The purpose or final cause of a knife is also relative to the user of the knife. Since we are speaking about implements for humans, a virtue of the knife may include such necessary properties as having one and that is emphatically not sharp so that the user can hold that end without being cut.\
\
Now if all this qualification is necessary for something so simple an artifact as a knife, it will take much more work to sketch even a plausible prima Facie Account of the final cause of simple natural objects, let alone complex organisms.  Doing that work is our task.\
\
What does Aristotle say is the telos of, say, an oak tree? The answer must be discovered at least in part empirically. Some induction or abstraction helps us to identify the form behind the phenomena we observe. Oaktree's tend to become fully grown folks. At some point the maturation process slows and stops. What do fully grown oaks do? What is their proper work? They provide oxygen into the atmosphere. They provide housing for birds, bugs, and shade and housing for primates and humans. They preserve the soil. They grow and reproduce. What properties might qualify as the virtues of an oak?  Certainly needs sunshine water atmosphere and soil of a certain kind to thrive Qua Oaktree.  But these are not its virtues, these are necessary conditions for the rising of its virtues. Contributing factors we might call them. Sources of life. It's virtues would be strength of limb, deep roots, strong cellulose walls, a sufficiently wide trunk, etc.\
\
What is the final cause of a human? What is our proper work? It is not a tautology to say that what we are supposed to do is to be men and women. For we can fail at that. Once we have human nature, we cannot fail to be human in some descriptive sense. But even though we have human nature, we can fail to be happy, to achieve humanity in a prescriptive cents.\
\
We are supposed to thrive, flesh, be happy. We are supposed to be Saints. That means wise thinkers and heroically virtuous doers.\
\
}