{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;
\f3\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f4\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red14\green14\blue14;\red255\green255\blue255;\red251\green255\blue244;
\red38\green38\blue38;\red20\green20\blue20;\red120\green9\blue17;\red28\green28\blue28;\red10\green0\blue109;
\red26\green26\blue26;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat143\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
"
\f1\fs32 \cf2 \cb3 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 And your life is ruined. 
\i [Golvach pauses]
\i0  It\'92s just ruined. Trust me. Everything is damaged. Nothing has the same meaning anymore. There is no real joy in life. You just go through the motions because you\'92re not suicidal, and you just do things, but your life will never be particularly joyous again \'85 Once this happens you\'92re going to have a very marginalized life at best. And thank you, United States government. I thought their first mandate was to protect us, but they\'92re just protecting their donors\'97 and it\'92s treason." Golvach, after the murder of his son\
({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2016/03/13/father-son-murdered-illegal-pro-amnesty-john-kasich-marco-rubio-tried-treason/"}}{\fldrslt http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2016/03/13/father-son-murdered-illegal-pro-amnesty-john-kasich-marco-rubio-tried-treason/}})
\f0\fs28 \cf0 \cb1 \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\
\
\'93W
\f1\fs24 \cb4 hat use would it be if a man had the wisdom of Nestor and wanted the necessaries of life, food and drink and clothes and the like? Where would be the advantage of wisdom then?\'94 Eryxias, in the dialogue 
\i Eryxias
\i0  (attributed to Plato)\

\f0\fs28 \cb1 \
The theme if our present chapter is to puzzle through one of the most difficult ethical questions: why be good? If the conclusions from the previous inquiry were on the mark, then we can rephrase this question without a change of meaning: why is virtue (especially practical wisdom) necessary for human flourishing? This is the same question, since, \'93virtue\'94 (especially practical wisdom) is what *good* is for creatures like us; and \'93human flourishing\'94 is  a name for, ex hypothesis, that indeterminate concept of the one thing worth pursuing. The question \'93why be good?\'94 or \'93why be virtuous?\'94 should not be taken as the irrational question in the vicinity: \'93why do anything at all? Why be motivate?\'94 Such a question is practical irrationality unadulterated, as we saw with Melville\'92s Bartleby. The preference not to do anything \'97 or the lack of preference to do anything \'97 is inhuman \'93madness\'94 or mental illness. \
\
The first character I should like to keep before our imagination is the Successful Man: wealthy, powerful, influential, well-connected, owning lots of land, designer clothes, and jets. This is Bruce Wayne, Donald Trump, or Hilary Clinton. We can playfully imagine them furthermore in the peak of life in beauty, health, and vigor. Whether or not this person is virtuous seems to be beside the point: they are Successful. They may not be wise but they enjoy the richness of the \'93aesthetic life.\'94\
\
The second character is the Scrappy Sage: even though these wise, unyielding in principle, scrupulous, discerning, practical, reliable,  beneficent, large-minded, generous, unflappable, just, undeceived and undeceivable, undistracted by petty pleasures, and far-sighted regarding the affairs of this life. This is Diogenes, Symeon Stylites, or John the Baptist who were despised for their lack of Success but admired and sought out for their Sagacity. They are ascetical sages but rejecting the aesthetic and embracing the \'93ethical life.\'94 \
\
The third is a combination of worldly success and virtuous sagacity: wealthy but wise, powerful but unyielding in principle, influential but scrupulous, well-connected by discerning, full of possessions but practical. This is King Solomon, Cato the Younger, or St. Katherine of Sienna. \
\
The question \'91why be good?\'92 is asked by someone who is earnestly in doubt as to whether it is better to be more like Solomon or St. Katherine than like Donald Trump or Hilary Clinton. They might agree that virtue and success together are better than virtue and no success; they are earnestly in doubt as to whether it would be better to have success without virtue or virtue without success. So the question \'93why be good?\'94 is not the question \'93Why be motivated at all?\'94 but \'93why not be motivated, after all, by success with or without virtue?\'92. \
\
This question is echoed by Eryxias: even supposing someone were as wise as Nestor, wouldn\'92t such a person be miserable without food and drink and clothes and the like? What *advantage* is wisdom? The assumption here is that the meaning of  \'93advantage\'94 is advantage for *us* here and now, not just abstract admirable qualities. \
\
If virtues is partly constitutive of flourishing (even \'93success\'94), then the question \'91why be virtuous?\'92 is close \'97 if not identical \'97 to the irrational question \'91why do what is worth doing?\'92. It is a conceptual confusion. However, if virtue is not constitutive of flourishing, then the question of whether *I* really ought to let virtue be the over overriding practical consideration instead of the alluring temptations of wealth, riches, sex, and power in however great of quantities I can achieve. \
\
So my first thesis in this chapter, is this: virtue is partly constitutive of human flourishing. This is my first step toward solving the problem of why be good. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
### Kindness\
\
Regarding kindness McDowell (1997, p. 142) states: A kind person has a reliable sensitivity to a certain sort of requirement that situations impose on behavior. The deliverances of a reliable sensitivity are cases of knowledge; and there are idioms according to which the sensitivity itself can appropriately be described as knowledge: a kind person knows what it is like to be confronted with a requirement of kindness. The sensitivity is, we might say, a sort of perceptual capacity. \
\
[\'93
\f1\fs32 \cf5 The university\'92s chancellor, Nicholas B. Dirks, and the executive vice chancellor and provost, Claude Steele, said they had accepted Dr. Marcy\'92s resignation and added: \'93We want to state unequivocally that Professor Marcy\'92s conduct, as determined by the investigation, was contemptible and inexcusable. We also want to express our sympathy to the women who were victimized, and we deeply regret the pain they have suffered.\'94]({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/15/science/geoffrey-marcy-to-resign-from-berkeley-astronomy-department.html"}}{\fldrslt http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/15/science/geoffrey-marcy-to-resign-from-berkeley-astronomy-department.html}})\
\
This astronomer sexually harassed students. The committee that investigated the allegations called his actions \'93contemptible and inexcusable.\'94 They did not express *their* contempt. \

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
\
\'93The particular version of virtue ethics I detail and discuss in this book is of a more general kind known as \'91neo\uc0\u8208 Aristotelian\'92. The general kind is \'91neo\'92 for at least the reason I noted above, that its proponents allow themselves to regard Aristotle as just plain wrong on slaves and women, and also because we do not restrict ourselves to Aristotle's list of virtues. (Charity or benevolence, for example, is not an Aristotelian virtue, but all virtue ethicists assume it is on the list now.) It is \'91Aristotelian\'92 in so far as it aims to stick pretty close to his ethical writings wherever else it can\'94 (%Hursthouse, 
\i On Virtue Ethics 
\i0 8). Comment: The neo-Aristotelian allows herself to demolish as much from Aristotle\'92s architectonic as she wants, and attempt in the vacuum to either rebuild a new structure that fits the same space or else patch the hole and move on.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri220\sl288\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \'93A child is born. It is immediately immersed in sensation and greeted with discomfort. It is relieved by fondling and feeding. It experiences touch and taste, hearing and sight, scent and movement. The earliest sensations are doubtless blurry. But soon, discrimination begins. This is a differential responsiveness to experiences. The child reaches out for milk, smiles at Mama, cries from loud noises.\
It is not clear when the first beliefs are formed. Their formation is facilitated by discrimination, but belief-formation is not entailed by discrimination. Belief requires understanding. Whereof one cannot understand, thereof one cannot believe. Understanding, in turn, requires concepts. Concepts arise in interlocking formations. Beliefs do not arise in isolation either, one doxastic atom at a time. Like concepts, they are formed, and work, in families.\
We are blessed not only with a receptiveness to learning from experience but also with a capacity to learn from what we already know. One route to learning is generalization: if a small yelping dog jumps at a child, the child expects much the same of a big one. Another, overlapping, route to learning is inference. Inference, too, appears early in life. We infer certain consequences of some of the things we believe. A child told that the family cannot have animals needs no logical prowess to infer that the puppy offered by neighbors will not be accepted. We also make inferences to the best explanation. The same child may infer from canine squeals at the door that the puppy is outside.\'94 (Robert Audi, 
\i Rationality and the Good, 
\i0 p. 3). \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri220\sl288\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 \'93\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
How Far Can Finlay Claim Naturalism?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1

\b0 \cf0 Taking a step back from the details discussed so far, let's say that we accept Finlay's reduction of normative terms to probabilistic terms. Does that mean that he has shown that normative properties just are a species of natural properties, thereby analytically reducing the normative to the natural? Only if we assume that probabilistic terms represent natural properties, and I think there is reason to worry about this assumption.\
Finlay doesn't define "natural", but he does helpfully describe his methodology as follows:\
\pard\pardeftab720\li960\sl288\slmult1
\cf0 I shall employ an analytic method, seeking a metaphysical analysis of normative facts, properties, and relations by means of a conceptual analysis of the meanings of the normative words by which we refer to them. The result will be a form of analytic reductionism (or "analytic naturalism"), an explanatory reduction of normative properties (etc.) into complexes of non-normative properties by reductively defining normative words and concepts in entirely non-normative terms. (p. 4)\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1
\cf0 This suggests that all it takes for a property to count as "natural" is for it to be non-normative. That, however, is clearly wrong (and can't really be what Finlay means, which he is quite clear about in his nice survey article "Four Faces of Moral Realism"). If we reduced normative properties into non-normative super-naturalproperties (e.g., through some sort of divine command theory), that clearly wouldn't count as a form of "analytic naturalism" in the sense that is at issue in metaethics. Hence, the more precise (though still frustratingly vague) characterization of a natural property typically used in metaethics is of a property that is countenanced by the best (scientific) theory of reality (e.g., that to which physics, chemistry, and biology are a good guide). But -- here's the worry -- are probabilities countenanced by the best scientific theory of reality?\
It's tempting to think that contemporary scientific theory is rife with appeals to statistics and chance, so probabilistic terms must have one of the best claims to count as representing natural properties. As Finlay recognizes, however, the sense of 'more probable' that he needs in his analysis of normative terms is one that encompasses not only so-called objective chances but also subjective likelihoods.\'94 (Matthew Chrisman, Review of Stephen Finlay\'92s Confusion of Tongues, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://ndpr.nd.edu/news/53456-confusion-of-tongues-a-theory-of-normative-language/"}}{\fldrslt https://ndpr.nd.edu/news/53456-confusion-of-tongues-a-theory-of-normative-language/}})\
\
Definition of philosophy according to the OED:\
\
==========\
Oxford Dictionary of English\
- Highlight Loc. 529900-529910  | Added on Friday, June 19, 2015, 02:57 PM\
\
philosophy n. (pl. philosophies) 1 [mass noun] the study of the fundamental nature of knowledge, reality, and existence, especially when considered as an academic discipline. See also NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. [count noun] a particular system of philosophical thought: the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle. the study of the theoretical basis of a particular branch of knowledge or experience: the philosophy of science. 2 a theory or attitude that acts as a guiding principle for behaviour: don't expect anything and you won't be disappointed, that's my philosophy.\
======\
\
\'93
\b 2.3 High moral theory\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1

\b0 \cf6 Normative ethical theories vary considerably in terms of their aspirations towards generalization, universality, abstractness, systematic organization, simplicity, and comprehensiveness (Nussbaum 2000, Flynn 2007). Paradigmatic examples of what we'll call \'93high moral theory\'94 attempt to embody most or all of these defining characteristics. Thus classical utilitarianism, Kantian deontology, and Rawlsian justice as fairness, for example, all strive for the articulation of a theoretical system based upon a small number of abstract fundamental principles (e.g., Mill's principle of utility, Kant's categorical imperative, and Rawls's famous two principles of justice) that they regard as the \'93keys\'94 to understanding the moral or political life. These principles in their pristine incarnations are capable of being articulated in a perfectly general and universal fashion without any reference to or dependency upon any particular social practices or cultural norms. They apply, so their authors tell us, to all rational agents as such.[{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/theory-bioethics/notes.html#14"}}{\fldrslt \cf7 14}}] Beginning from these highly abstract and universally binding moral norms, standard examples of high moral theory ramify into complex systems encompassing basic and derivative moral principles (e.g., respect the autonomy of rational agents), rules based upon such principles (e.g., do not enlist patients in biomedical research without first gaining their informed consent), and, finally, judgments animated by such principles and rules bearing on particular cases (e.g., the Tuskegee syphilis study was unethical).\
Although most philosophers might naturally think of such highly abstract and ambitious constructions as paradigmatic examples of moral theory, and most likely have precisely such theories in mind when asked about the relationships between bioethics and ethical theory, they do not exhaust the space of normative theorizing either in bioethics or within the moral life more generally.\'94 (John Arras, \'93Theory and Bioethics\'94, 
\i The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, (
\i0 Summer 2013 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).\
\
A response: My account is an attempt to strike a balance between high and common. Such attempts are fraught with danger. The high aims for truth, systematicity, simplicity, elegance; the common aims for usefulness, practicality, complexity to match the rough and tumble of situational ethics, and ruggedness. These two sets of aims are either incompatible 
\i or only compatible barely. 
\i0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1

\b \cf6 Moral Disagreement Today and the Claims of Emotivism\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1

\b0 \cf6 \'93Keynes: \'91In practice, victory was with those who could speak with the greatest appearance of clear, undoubting conviction and could best use the accents of infallibility,\'92 and Keynes goes on to describe the effectiveness of Moore\'92s gasps of incredulity and head-shaking, of Strachey\'92s grim silences and of Lowes Dickinson\'92s shrugs.\'94 (MacIntyre, 
\i After Virtue 
\i0 17)\
 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1

\b \cf6 Plato, Sophist\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1

\b0 \cf0 \'93There appears to be a sort of war of Giants and Gods going on amongst them; they are fighting with one another about the nature of essence.\'94\
\'93How is that?\'94 \
\'93Some of them are dragging down all things from heaven and from the unseen to earth, and they literally grasp in their hands rocks and oaks; of these they lay hold, and obstinately maintain, that the things only which can be touched or handled have being or essence, because they define being and body as one, and if any one else says that what is not a body exists they altogether despise him, and will hear of nothing but body.\'94 \
\'93I have often met with such men, and terrible fellows they are.\'94\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1

\b \cf0 Biology and Virtue?
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1\qj\parhyphenfactor20
\cf0 \'93In 
\i After Virtue
\i0  he had rejected Aristotle's biological teleology \'96 which is the idea that human beings have a telos because of the particular kind of creature that we are. Aristotle says that only human beings have the ability to speak and reason and therefore our telos is to develop that reason. In 
\i Dependent Rational Animals
\i0  MacIntyre now accepts the idea of a biological teleology, but much of his argument for this is based on the idea that it is 
\i not
\i0  human beings alone that have the ability to speak and reason; dolphins and gorillas can also do these things, and we can learn something about humans from how these other animals pursue their individual and collective goods. What we learn is that for human beings the key to flourishing is to be an independent practical reasoner\'94 (
\i Dependent Rational Animals
\i0  77).\'94 (Clayton, \'93Political Philosophy of Alasdair MacIntyre\'94, 
\i Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.iep.utm.edu/p-macint/#H6"}}{\fldrslt http://www.iep.utm.edu/p-macint/#H6}}
\i0 )\
\

\b Moral Reasoning Practical Reasoning
\b0 \
\'93For Aristotle, moral philosophy is a study of practical reasoning, and the excellences or virtues that Aristotle recommends in the 
\i Nicomachean Ethics
\i0  are the intellectual and moral excellences that make a moral agent effective as an independent practical reasoner.\'94 (Christopher Stephen Lutz, \'93Alasdair MacIntyre\'94 Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy). \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1

\b \cf0 Philosophical ethics
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1
\cf6 \'93The history of moral theory is a history of attempts to identify, articulate, and defend general moral principles that serve to explain when and why various types of action, institutions, or characters count as right or wrong, just or unjust, virtuous or vicious. The assumption has consistently been that there is a general and principled account of morality to be given\'94 (Sayre-McCord 2014).\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1

\b \cf6 Moral realism is not scientific
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1
\cf0 \'93One major concern that many people have had about the answer to this question is that they have noticed that morality is not a very scientific topic\'94 (Schroeder 2010, 15). \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl448
\cf8 \'93A tradition is an argument extended through time in which certain fundamental agreements are defined and redefined" in terms of both internal and external debates\'94 (MacIntyre 1988, 9). \
\

\b Not anthropocentric, but biocentric (if not yet cosmological)\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl448

\f2\b0 \cf8 \'93A thing is right when it tends to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biotic_community"}}{\fldrslt \cf9 biotic community}}. It is wrong when it tends otherwise.\'94 Aldo Leopold, \'93Land Ethic\'94 in 
\i A Sand Country Almanic, 
\i0 Oxford, 1949. p. 262. \
\
\

\b Natural Law and Ought
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f3\fs38 \cf0 \'93Sixth, Anscombe\'92s hypothesis does not explain what it is supposed to explain, which is the separation of the \'91ought\'92 from the \'91is\'92. For even if one needs a law to give sense to this \'91ought\'92, why should not nature, instead of God, be the law- giver? We may have lost the notion of divine law but we have also lost the notion of natural law; and the latter is the crucial one, for if it were the support of the \'91ought\'92 and the relevant sense of nature was lost, it would be very easy to explain why the \'91ought\'92 should be divorced from the \'91is\'92. The same would not be so if a law-giving God was lost but a law-giving nature retained, for then, while the \'91ought\'92 would be separated from religion, it would not be separated from the \'91is\'92.\'94 (
\f4\fs26 \cf10 Simpson, Peter, and Sine Quibus Non. "Goodness and nature." 
\i Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff
\i0  (1987)., p 85)\
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480

\f1\fs32 \cf0 \'93MacIntyre convincingly proves that rationality and ethics are inseparable; that it is impossible for the unjust person to think rationally, or for the irrational person to be just. Consequently, the liberal presumption of a shared, ahistorical, \'93objective\'94 rationality which can be brought to bear to resolve differences in values and conceptions of justice, is a delusion.\'94
\f0\b\fs28 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
Andy Blunden, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://home.mira.net/~andy/works/macintyre.htm"}}{\fldrslt http://home.mira.net/~andy/works/macintyre.htm}}\
}