{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
## Draft 2\
\
This dissertation defends the thesis that norms are real and part of nature, that human nature is radically continuous with nature, but that nature is not to be understood as merely material or physical. \
\
The primary rival to my view is "naturalism" -- a family of views that are normally taken to problematize metanormative realism. I try to clarify these problems.  Upon clarification, it will be seen that either they are true but not problems, or problems but not true.\
\
##Draft 11?\
\
This dissertation defends the thesis that neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics are sufficiently naturalistic, but that \'91naturalism\'92 when clarified does not mean much. The interesting questions are whether neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics is (a) true, (b), useful, (c), compatible with atheism, (d) compatible with physicalism. \
\
\
\
\
## Some Other Theses\
\
1. Normativity is an internal or necessary part of human nature. \
2. Humans are natural -- that is, we are radically continuous with nature.\
3. Normativity is an internal or necessary part of nature. \
4. To begin our understanding of ourselves by studying all that is not us (stars, trees, rocks, amoeba, giraffes) is insane; to begin our understanding of all that is not us (physics, chemistry, botany, biology, astronomy) by studying ourselves is perfectly reasonable. \
5. Nature includes *ends* (teloi) as well as value-properties like goodness and beauty. \
6.  Normativity for human nature means: We really ought to think in certain ways and act in certain ways.\
7. Number six is not all of nature's normativity. \
8. Excellence and beauty are both goods but different from each other. \
}