{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat143\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
24. Harman, Gilbert. \'93Moral Explanations of Natural Facts: Can Moral Claims Be Tested Against Reality?\'94 Southern Journal of Philosophy, 24 (Supplement): 57\'9668. 1986.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b\fs36 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Gilbert Harman\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\fs28 \cf0 Overview:\
Synopsis:\
Reflections:\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri220\sl276\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\f2\b0\fs22 \cf0 Gilbert Harman asks whether "moral claims can be tested against moral reality" (Gilbert Harman, "Moral Expalanations of Natural Facts", Southern Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 24 (1986) pp. 57-68.) His short answer is 'No.' But Sturgeon and Railton and others are up to Harman's challenge. They show moral claims being tested against moral reality or moral explanations of natural facts being superior in plausibility or explanatory power to nonmoral explanations. Sturgeon, for instance, thinks that when I see boys setting a cat on fire I come to believe that something wrong is happening.  Just as I explain my belief that my computer is on by observing that the screen is lighting up (in response to the fact), the most plausible explanation for my belief is that something wrong is happening is that the cat burning is going on right in front of me. }