{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Do we have a right to objectivity rhetoric? \
\
Objections
\b0 \
Some object to objectivity rhetoric on the grounds that it is indefensible. Rosenberg\'92s article \'93Objectivity and Modern Idealism\'94 excellently summarizes the way in which post-Kantian debates over idealism have transformed and re-appeared in contemporary debates over objectivity. But do we have a right to such language? John McDowell\'92s mind/world account is an attempt to answer in the negative, to therapeutically exorcise the worries that arise from such a sideways-on picture of our relation to the world. \
\
Stefan Bird-Pollan once commented on a paper of mine to the effect that my critique of John McDowell did not take into account this critique of a sideways on mind/world picture. \
\

\b On the other hand 
\b0 \
\
I think our right to this language is indisputable. \
\

\b Arguments
\b0 \
For one, expunging such language is impossible. \
\
If it is indeed impossible, then we ought to explain why it is. It is impossible not to think and talk about mind-world fit because such a picture is a true picture. I do not know how such a faith in the inherent correctness of the indespensible features of rationality is to be defended against the faithless. I have not yet suffered enough time in the dialectical vice grip of idealism, skepticism, Humeanism or whatever it is that made Immanual Kant no longer a platonist and a dogmatist. I am still a platonist and a dogmatist. }