{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 1. Moral Discourse as a species of Normative Discourse
\b0 \
If metaethics is the discipline in which we explain moral talk, then metaethical theories are, first and foremost, 
\i explanations 
\i0 of data. Of course, competing and incompatible explanations can be equally plausible with respect to how well the account for the data. But we aim for the 
\i best 
\i0 explanation, all things considered.\
If this is right, secondly, the data is \'93our moral talk.\'94 Now, our moral talk is not a simple, singular phenomenon. By analogy, \'93football talk\'94 is a phenomenon that encompasses talk about American football and European football, about teams (like the Rams), games (\'93last night\'92s game\'94 and \'93Superbowl III\'94), plays, players, and so on. Football talk is also connected, in practice, with talk about advertisements shown on television, the food sold at football stadiums, and so on.\
Least controversially, moral talk includes judgments about whether actions are right or wrong. In moral talk, we evaluate people\'92s actions. We judge ourselves and other living persons as well as hypothetical entities (Spiderman, Sherlock Holmes) or abstract non-human persons (Shiva, St. Michael) or historical persons (Caeser, George Washington). We evaluate people for their moral and intellectual qualities. But there is more to our \'93moral talk.\'94 Using the same family of words, we praise and blame people for their mental lives. Also, using oftentimes the same family of words, we also evaluate living things, systems, and non-living things. I call such a broad range of evaluative talk \'93normative discourse\'94 and the attempt to explain normative discourse metanormativity. It seems to me that, despite differentia between evaluations of moral, epistemic, and other kinds of values, the structure of normative discourse bears fundamental commonalities. Morality, epistemology, law, aesthetics, and many others refer to normative facts. Normative facts are the way things 
\i ought 
\i0 to be, ways things 
\i would be 
\i0 good (Moore 1901 %)
\i . 
\i0 \
For one thing, we make all sorts of moral evaluations using all sorts of terms: good, beautiful, true, faithful, loving, kind (positive); and bad, ugly, false, cheating, apathetic, and cruel (negative). \
But also, we evaluate people along broader lines than obviously 
\i moral 
\i0 talk. \'93She is smart\'94 is clearly a piece of praise but is not so clearly 
\i moral 
\i0 praise. \'93She is smart because she studies harder and cares more than everyone else\'94 might be a piece of moral praise in that it highlights the virtues of diligence and zeal by which she has attained knowledge, or quickness, or intellectual skill. But absent such details, evaluative terms that praise or blame a person\'92s intellectual \
Even more broadly, we evaluate things that are not people and are not, strictly speaking, responsible for the way they are. \
We also evaluate using less obviously evaluative terms: \'93the library is quite orderly\'94; \'93his campaign was a surprise\'94. Is the word \'93orderly\'94 a value term? It seems so to me. What about \'93surprise\'94? In context, English speakers don\'92t commonly use \'91surprise\'92 to indicate something unexpected and negative, but something unexpected and positive (\'93a surprise birthday party\'94). We perhaps deploy \'93shock\'94 to indicated a negative unexpected event (we can only imagine what would warrant the description, \'93a shocking birthday party\'94).  \
Metaethical theory must explain the objective purport of our evaluative talk (Gibbard; Finlay). I here assume normative realism of the sort Peter Schaber defends (Schaber). So my focus shall be the debate between naturalist and non-naturalist realists. \
}