{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\i\fs24 \cf0 \'93Every soul pursues the good and does whatever it does for its sake. It divines that the good is something but is perplexed and cannot adequately grasp what it is.\'94
\i0  Plato, Republic 505e-506a.\
\
What is the purpose of metaethics?
\f1 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0 Thanks to David Bradshaw, Timothy Sundell, Terrence Cuneo, Russ Shafer-Landau, Alan Gibbered, Peter Schaber, and the audiences at University of Michigan for helpful comments on drafts of this paper. 
\f1 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0  Is it to explain moral disagreement? (Schroeder) Is it to discover an objective basis underwriting our moral judgments or show why such discovery is impossible? (Shafer-Landau 2005, 1) To explore the foundations of moral values, properties, and words? (DeLapp) To understand the presuppositions of moral talk? (Sayre-McCord 2012). On one popular view, the purpose of metaethical theories is simply to explain our moral talk (Schroeder 2005; Gibbard 2008). I think this popular view is right. Anti-realists explain why the ethical talk is massively mistaken in some way, but show why we (nonetheless) talk like that (Rosen). Realists explain why moral talk is aspiring to refer to moral facts and express moral truths and how sometimes (or indeed often) it succeeds at doing so, giving accounts of just what moral facts are, how we might come to moral knowledge, and so on (Shafer-Landau 2005; Timmons). \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Section I
\i\b0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i0 \cf0 In the first section I elaborate just what the domain of \'93moral talk\'94 includes, arguing for a broader set of data we might call \'93normative talk,\'94 including but not limited to talk of morals, epistemic virtues, human and non-human goods, and beauty, and so on. These diverse normative concepts, words, and propositions belong to a natural family of normative discourse, or so I shall argue.  \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Section II\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 In the second section, I apply this thesis to the debate over naturalism and non-naturalism. The point is that we cannot simply give an account of narrowly 
\i moral 
\i0 normativity and leave it at that. Another way of putting the same point: the domain of ethics is not just the domain of prohibitions about, say, harming others, but the domain of 
\i ethos 
\i0 encompasses law, politics, morality, prudence, beauty, order, and truth. If our metaethical theory 
\i only 
\i0 explains \'93ethical\'94 talk in the narrow sense of the term, it is inadequate even if true. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Section III\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 In the third section, with the criterion of section II  in mind, I critique Richard Boyd\'92s metaethical proposal that \'91good\'92 and like terms pick out a special sort of natural kind (which he calls homeostatic property clusters). I commend, instead, something more like Robert Adam\'92s metaethical proposal that \'91good\'92 picks out a transcendent but unitary property that is recognizably one despite being instantiated in a wide variety of domains and particular objects. \
The point here is not that satisfying this criterion automatically guarantees that Adams\'92 theory is 
\i correct. 
\i0 Although I think it is correct, my point here is to raise the bar for what counts as an adequate metaethical theory that purports to explain moral talk. Such theories should be broader metanormative theories, or should constituted a clearly defined part of, broader metanormative theories.\
\
To anticipate my conclusions here: I shall argue that  our most stable and cogent ethical thinking, and our most incorrigible ethical principles, sit better in a framework where the good is understood to be transcendent and unitary.  (1) Adams\'92 account most accurately explains the intuitive truth that we ought to be open to revising many ethical beliefs but that there are some that we (already) know certainly enough that we ought not be open to revising them. (2) Boyd\'92s homeostatic property cluster idea, though impressive and thorough, is not yet ambitious enough to even aspire to explain the numerous (and apparently irreducible) various kinds of goodness (and beauty, and excellence, etc.) but restricts itself to human welfare, which is only part of an adequate metaethics. And (3) epistemic norms are more closely related to ethical norms than Boyd would like to admit.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
Section IV\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Finally, in section four, I respond to two objections: such a framework is problematically theistic, so for those who lean toward atheism or agnosticism, they should not accept a unitary and transcendent good without an entirely different set of arguments from the philosophy of religion; and secondly, that the unity and transcendence of the good is problematically non-naturalistic, so for naturalists they should remain agnostic and wait for further research. \
\
}