{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Darwell\'92s essay argues that metaethics (or analytic ethics or critical ethics) is best practiced within a dynamic union with normative ethics. (The combination of the two, Darwall suggests, might be called 
\i philosophical 
\i0 ethics.) Not only was this how Moore approached ethics in 1903, but it is how many contemporary writers are approaching ethics, despite the trend in the middle of the century to write 
\i either 
\i0 about metaethical issues or ignore them for the sake of normative ethical ones. \
\
I take my task to be to advance anglophone virtue ethics but to do so by virtue of addressing head on some of the most pressing, most challenging, and (to me at least) most interesting objections and questions. Objections come from opponents and questions from often confused bystanders.  \
In one sense, the normative ethical content of virtue ethics is simple: go acquire virtues. There is much more to it than that. But virtue education tries to instill virtues in children; virtue politics tries to create polities in which it is {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://F6972D46-4D61-4B1C-A208-2AA04606FDFE"}}{\fldrslt \'93easy to be good\'94}} and politicians who are scrupulous, upstanding, wise, honest, and trustworthy; virtue epistemology tries to show what character traits are necessary or beneficial or sufficient for being the kind of person who can know things. And so on. \
But then the questions begin: which traits are virtues? What do you mean by \'93virtuous\'94? Is there really happiness? \
\
Many of the objections and questions for virtue ethical writers like MacIntyre, Foot, Hursthouse, and McDowell are objections and questions with correlates outside of virtue ethics. \
1. Words. {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://AADA1C6F-8241-445F-962D-64A0DF50B03C"}}{\fldrslt Moore\'92s analytic ethics was part of the linguistic turn in philoso}}phy.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\i\fs28 Metaethics After Moore 
\i0 % 
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  He thought the failure of much ethical writing before him was a lamentable inattention to the terms deployed in that writing. What is a virtue? What does it mean to say that the natural end of human life is happiness? \
2. Properties. Moore argued that goodness was a simple, undefinable concept and a simple, non-natural and irreducible property. Just what are we talking about in the nexus of related locutions like the following? Virtues are good for people; happiness is the good; for people like us, goodness is virtue. What is a virtue (not the word now, but the thing)? \
3. Knowledge. Moore argued that the belief \'93X is good\'94 is based on noticing the property of goodness \'97 intuited directly \'97 and neither requires nor admits of support from any other belief. How do I know which traits are virtues? \
	3b. Disagreement. If I can intuit that X is good but you cannot, is there any way to adjudicate our disagreement? In the context of virtue ethics, how do I know which list of virtues to ally myself to? \
4. Human Nature. Moore argues that the greatest intrinsic goods are, for us, the pleasures of friendship and the pleasures of beauty (in art and nature). These are the goods worth pursuing, and the production of these goods justifies right actions. But what are we? And what is our relationship to nature? What are human beings such that we enjoy friendship and create and consume beauty? In this vein, is there really a human nature such that happiness or eudaemonia even makes sense conceptually? \
5. Nature (all of reality). Moore opens up the discussion for a cosmic rather than merely human perspective when he includes the beauty of nature. This cosmological perspective is welcome.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Panayot Butchvarov, \'93Ethics Dehumanized\'94 in 
\i Metaethics After Moore.
\i0  %
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  Human beings need not and ought not occupy \'93center stage\'94 of our ethical thinking. \
	5b. Under this heading, is nature teleological? Is there such thing as natural normativity?  \
\
So each of the thinkers I will examine are virtue ethicists but also address, more or less explicitly, these five metaethical topics and these (or closely related) objections and/or questions. }