{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 How do we live well? This is a question every person asks at some point in his or her life, either because life is so clearly not going well or perhaps due to a longing for something more, and better.\
This is the question that many philosophers have asked and attempted to answer. And there is no end to rival answers. \
Religious people have a simple answer: obey God. For Christians, Jews, and Muslims, for instance, living well means fulfilling one\'92s role in relation to the supreme creator: sacrifice, honor, worship, love, prayer, and so on \'97 and also loving one\'92s fellow man. Even this \'93simple answer\'94 is complicated when we ask the follow up question: What does God command? What exactly are my roles and obligations to God? \
Non-religious people have variety of answers to the question, how do we live well? Fulfill your deepest and most authentic desires; honor your ancestors; become a fully actualized self; protect and benefit the less fortunate; win fame, wealth, and power in entertainment, business, or politics; support and raise a family. \
Each of these answers may be considered a life plan. A life plan, roughly, is a set of instructions or recommendations for how to succeed in the long-term. It includes explicit or assumed criteria for \'93success\'94. It includes recommendations not only for what to do in this or that situation in the short-term projects (how to study for the SAT/ACT, how to compose a resume) but what to do at major turning points that often characterize human life (birth, education, marriage, career, child-bearing, deaths in the family, middle-age, and one\'92s own death). Life plans are more specific than principles but more flexible than maxims or commandments. A single life plan can unite an entire culture without hindering the bewildering variety of different and unique individuals from expressing their own individuality and fulfilling their own identity. \
Yet despite the variety of (often contradictory) life plans, we can observe a common thread. Regardless of the time, place, culture, religion (or lack thereof) and language of the advice-giver, all these life plans tell us something about 
\i what it means to be human. \'91
\i0 How do 
\i we 
\i0 live well?\'92 is a question about 
\i us.
\i0  So obviously the answer will assume or make explicit some understanding of who we are. The secular humanist and the Christian theist can agree that, whatever the best life plan, it will enable human to become who they really are, to be excellent 
\i humans. 
\i0 \
For this reason, virtue theory is especially interesting. A virtue, by definition, manliness. \'91Manliness\'92 is not to be understood here in sexist terms as exclusively masculine, but as 
\i humanliness. 
\i0 There is a presumption of what human nature is, is not and could never be, and is not but could be. 
\i \

\i0 These investigations can be ventured with the historical tradition in view or they can be taken up by us, again, from our own point of view, today. Historically, what did Aristotle think? What have other virtue ethicists thought? For Aristotle, and those in the Aristotelian tradition, the goal of living well animates discussion about character traits that virtually every person in virtually every culture intuitively recognizes as admirable: courage, promise-keeping, moderation, truth-telling. Even Nietzsche, that great moral skeptic, that great troll, that great rabble-rouser, commended those who would throw off slave morality 
\i for their courage. 
\i0 He insinuated that it takes \'93courage\'94 to deny the truth and to deceive oneself \'97 unable to fully buck the assumption that courage was an objective moral good. \
So when we examine these admirable traits there are a few questions that arise. What is a virtue? And how many are there? What is the list of virtues \'97 which traits are truly virtuous? Since \'93living virtuously\'94 is supposed to answer the question about living 
\i well, 
\i0 can we say more about \'93wellness,\'94 \'97 health, success, happiness, good fortune, flourishing? \
Virtues, Aquinas taught, are not contrary to human nature but are not automatic. Is there even such thing as human nature? \
Humans, Darwin taught, are animals with the same backstory as every other animal. Does our evolutionary history teach us anything about what character traits are admirable, or about the moral faculty by which we discern what is admirable and despicable? \
The contemporary virtue ethicists who also explore these primary ethical answers to the fundamental practical question about how to live well and who also explore these higher-order abstract questions are Anscombe, MacIntyre, Foot, Hursthouse, MacDowell, Nussbaum, Thompson, and others. They each offer a virtue account and respond to various objections. For instance, virtue theory (like any other moral realism) must deal with the problem of disagreement, the worry that if reasonable parties disagree about a matter then there is no fact of the matter. \
This dissertation is and exploration and answer the question how to live well. It responds to a variety of the most pressing and interesting objections to the virtue theories of MacIntyre, Foot, Hursthouse, and others. }