{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Suppose that modernity is a moral disaster. \
MacIntyre explains the present disastrous state of things through the modern rejection of telos. Teleological nihilism as we might call the view that there are no real, natural teloi. There may be teloi but they are all features of 
\i us, 
\i0 not features of the external world. They may be psychological projections upon the world that appear incorrigibly to be features of the real, natural world. But reflection can, somehow, expose this appearance as illusion. \
The recovery of telos, Taylor points out, may be undertaken in one of two ways. Both ways fundamentally agree with MacIntyre\'92s diagnosis of modernity and agree with the prognosis that we must recovery our belief \'97 acknowledgment of \'97 teloi. But the tension between the two ways represents and important crux upon which even MacIntyre\'92s sympathizers must align themselves. \
The first way of recovering telos is to identify those tenets of teleological nihilism explicit or implicit in characteristically modern doctrines and to reject both those tenets and the doctrines with which they are intertwined. This is an amputation surgery. The doctrine is infected by teleological nihilism and must be removed. \
The second way of recovering telos is to chart those tenets of teleological nihilism explicit or implicit in characteristically modern doctrines and reject the teleological nihilism but retain, in modified form certainly, but retain improved versions of the doctrines in which they were formerly intertwined. This is a tumorectomy. The doctrine is infected by teleological nihilism may be saved, even cured, by the removal of the offending tenet (followed by whatever curative or restorative work might be needed).\
Let\'92s look at an example. \
One doctrine of modernity is the idealization and glorification of \'93disengaged freedom.\'94 According to Taylor, the concept of freedom assumed in modernity is that of procedural rationality. Rationality is not a substantial concept defined by say, the acknowledgement of an external world or the belief that I am a human being rather than an archangel. Similarly, ethics is procedural, not substantive. The Kantian ethic of rule-following is abstract, rational, universal, and identical for each rational agent. The same rule followed by different agents is supposed to produce the same end. In this way, the freedom of moral agency is identical with obedience to moral rules. The Aristotelian conception of ethics is more substantive \'97 practical rationality must embrace some goods before and during procedural analysis or means-end instrumental reasoning. \
This view of the substantive good of freedom seems\'85 good. At least to moderns. Can this view of the substantive good of freedom be saved? Or is it a casualty of a restoration of Aristotelian tradition?\
}