{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ###  Critical Project, Constructive Project ###\
\
Characterizing MacIntyre's life work as an invitation to recover the virtues assumes a problem -- a lack, a disaster, a crisis -- to which the tradition of virtue might be a panacea. So I'd like to say a few words about his broader project. MacIntyre\'92s ethical oeuvre spans many decades, eighteen books, and (to date) more than three hundred published articles. He has also evolved through many ideologies: Marxism, Aristotelianism, Christianity, Thomism. But persistent through each phase is a radical discontentment with and criticism of post-Enlightenment modernity.[@mcmylor2005alasdair] \
\
To trace this discontentment, we might frame MacIntyre\'92s later ethical oeuvre as a response to the problem of moral disagreement. His earlier writings focused on ethics. These writings took for granted some of the major modern assumptions about what moral inquiry is and what it can and should do.  But very early on, he noticed that the state of the art was disarray. The first and most obvious symptom of the decay of moral discourse and social unity is interminable ethical disagreement.[@macintyre1984after 6] Moral discourse is largely devoted to moral disagreement, and moral disagreement is largely soaked in despair of ever reaching agreement.\
\
The dual aspect of modern moral philosophy is that disputants on either side pretend to have objective moral truth yet possess no unavailable rational standard for supporting their own view. Without rational standards to support one\'92s own view, disputants are without rational standards by which to *rationally* persuade others. Individually, these aspects are not puzzling: One pattern is that when I meet people who do not share my tastes or preferences, I do not browbeat; I simply I live and let live. Another pattern is that when I meet people whom I view as ignorant or mistaken,  I try to persuade them by appealing to evidence to ascribe to the same rational, putatively objective standards I endorse. But moral discourse doesn\'92t fit either of these non-puzzling patterns. how can my own, arbitrary, unaccountable opinions and preferences form the basis for browbeating those who do not share the same opinions and preferences as if they were not just different from me but ignorant and mistaken? Moral discourse with its expression of moral disagreement still retain the appearance of rationality at the same time that the seem to have given up on the rationality and publicly-accessible nature of morality. \
\
Professional ethicists disagreed with each other on any normative point you can think of (the permissibility of abortion, the standards of justice in war, the limits of medical regulation), on normative frameworks (deontology, utilitarianism, divine command theory, contractarianism), and on metaethical points (moral realism, moral epistemology, moral semantics), and more. He was frustrated (as we have all been) but the apparent impossibility of settling some moral disagreements. Both parties are passionate, informed, intelligent, open-minded and yet cannot come to anything like agreeing on the formal and material propositions under dispute. The apparent impossibility of settling moral disagreements over weighty primary normative issues, like abortion, sexual ethics, torture, war, the proper uses of technology has become the defining datum of modern reflection on morality and ethics. \
\
There is a striking similarity between moral/philosophical disagreements and kinds of disagreements in natural sciences. Those familiar with the philosophy of science conversation about methodology and disagreement may notice this. MacIntyre certainly did. Thomas Kuhn\'92s watershed Structure of Scientific Revolutions challenges the widespread naive belief that consensus in natural scientific inquires has been growing, steadily, in a straight line, since the 1600s. Rather, Kuhn persuasively argues, specific paradigms by which practitioners conduct research and through which they interpret evidence come and go. Some are fruitful, and are employed for generations. The paradigm is a research program around which many can unite as well as a stable scientific system of doctrine that can be added to or pruned. But lingering worries about the fine points of a scientific system and research program beget doubts about that system as a whole. At certain periods of epistemological crisis, researchers from rival programs (once dismissed) burst into the limelight by solving a problem the previous paradigm did not have the conceptual resources to solve. A paradigm shifts, a revolution has occurred. The new paradigm, once revolutionary, becomes the stable scientific system of a new era. From the perspective of one paradigm, it is difficult or impossible to judge the rational credentials of a rival paradigm.\
\
MacIntyre began to speculate about the possibility that Kuhn and Feyarabend\'92s analyses of scientific progress and scientific crisis could be fruitfully applied to ethics. His 1977 essay on epistemological crises was his own version of Kuhn's *Structure of Scientific Revolutions* -- we might call it MacIntyre's "Structure of Ethical Revolutions".[@macintyre1977epistemological] But unlike Kuhn, MacIntyre is not a postmodernist; while Feyerabend ended in a radical pluralism about rationality and methodology, a scientific relativism unpalatable to many scientific realists, MacIntyre\'92s theory attempts to avoid relativism. Some would say he was unsuccessful. But this is getting ahead of myself.  \
\
The fact is that people disagree about morals. Many metaethicists react such widespread, rampant, shrill, and apparently intractable moral disagreement by giving up on moral realism. The old project was a searching for the objective moral facts, the self-evident moral truths, or fundamental moral principles by which moral disagreements can be peaceably and reasonably settled without browbeating, censorship, name-calling, and ejection from the conversation. The new project is to accept the painful truth that there are no such facts, no such truths, no such principles: agreement is either impossible or is going to come about by different means: social contract, say, or disparate communities accepting disparate sets of \'93common values\'94, each set incommensurable with the others but also invincible to criticism.\
\
Other metaethicists react to widespread moral disagreement by redoubling their efforts to restore moral agreement by reference to moral facts, truths, or principles. Kantian (Korsgaard), utilitarian, contractarian, and now virtue ethical theorists compete in the marketplace of metaethics for the proper way to secure morality. \
\
It may not be obvious to those of us reading deeply in the discipline, but a moment\'92s reflection on modern metaethics reveals an iteration of the problem of moral disagreement. The disagreement among metaethicists (since Moore) about the proper explanation of and solution to disagreement among ethicists (since Hobbes, Hume, and Kant) has become the new problem of disagreement. \
\
This comparison between ethical crises and scientific crises makes clear why the epistemology of morality features so prominently in MacIntyre's later works. He is not only trying to give an account of the good but trying to give an account of the rational faculties and rational resources by which communities and individuals discover the good. }