{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf110
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### *Dependent Rational Animals* ###\
\
This discussion has, so far, kept itself mostly to *After Virtue*, only alluding to other works in the \'93*After Virtue* Project.\'94 I would like now to continue the story by including some themes and details from *Dependent Rational Animals* before turning to a critical response. \
\
The project of *Dependent Rational Animals* is to insist that (a) human beings are animals even if we are animals of a particular and unusual sort; and that (b) our dependence and vulnerability are as morally important as our independence, our autonomy and self-sufficiency; there are virtues of both autonomy *and* dependence. The book also contends that (c) certain social arrangements are conducive to the transmission and sustenance of both kinds of virtue.  \
\
Let\'92s consider a key quotation on each of these themes. Regarding (a) the notion that we are unusual animals, MacIntyre argues at length that the human differentia (be it language, reason, practical reason, self-consciousness, or what have you) does not eradicate or overshadow the commonalities between us and other animals. \'93I shall contend that although our differences from all other species are certainly of crucial importance, it is also important that both initially in our earliest childhood activities and to some extent thereafter we comport ourselves towards the world in much the same way as other intelligent animals. Indeed our ability to transcend those limitations depends in part upon certain of those animal characteristics among them the nature of our identity.\'94[@macintyre1999dependent 8] \
\
The important connection to *Whose Justice? Which Rationality* should be clear: rationality *taken as the whole process of judging truth and falsity* is a continuum that includes us and \'93lower\'94 animals. \
\
Regarding (b), he argues that vulnerability, dependence, affliction characteristic especially of early childhood and old age, but also of any sickness, injury, or misfortune are highly morally significant.  As he says he \'93virtues of independent rational agency need for their adequate exercise to be accompanied by what I shall call the virtues of acknowledge dependence and that a failure to understand this is apt to secure some features of rational agency. Moreover both sets of virtues are needed in order to actualize the distinctive potentialities they're specific to the human rational animal. Identifying how do while they are needed is a prerequisite for understanding their central place in the kind of human life through which human flourishing can be achieved.\'94[@macintyre1999dependent 8]\
\
In other words, an important truth missing from both the Aristotelian tradition and the tradition of modern liberalism is emphasis on the virtues of acknowledged dependence. In this we can clearly see MacIntyre\'92s essentially *progressive* aspirations. By imbibing the tradition of virtue and reflecting upon it, we can notice conflicts and miniature crises that spur us to improvements. \
\
Finally, regarding (c), MacIntyre argues that \'93neither the modern state nor the modern family can supply that kind of political and social association that is needed.\'94[@macintyre1999dependent 9]\
\
So we may fairly draw this connection between *Dependent Rational Animals* and *After Virtue*: since human beings are animals, social animals, and social practically-reasoning animals, our account of ends and virtues must be sensitive to all three of these points. \
\
On the one extreme, we are not mere worms or beasts (without any practical reason whatsoever) nor, on the other extreme, are we autonomous gods (without any dependency whatsoever). A human being is a practical reasoner in a human community. I would venture so far as to suggest this axiom as a definition of our species. (It is more accurate than flat-nailed featherless bipeds.) We are social animals by nature, and we are practical animals by nature, and we are reasoners by nature.}