{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 # Front Matter #\
**Title of Dissertation**\
\
\
// Lord, have mercy!\
\
\
\
// lines here\
\
**Dissertation**\
\
// lines here\
\
\
A dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy at the University of Kentucky\
\
By \
\
Keith E. D. Buhler\
\
Lexington, Kentucky\
\
Director: Dr. David Bradshaw, Professor of Philosophy\
\
Lexington Kentucky\
\
2017\
\
Copyright (c) Keith E. D. Buhler 2017 \
\
	// Make 2 inches from bottom\
\
\
#Abstract\
//	The abstract must not exceed 350 words and must be single-spaced. Do not include graphs, charts, tables or other illustrations in the abstract. If the abstract is not in English, provide an English translation. Include no more than 6 keywords or key phrases at the end of the abstract for indexing and cataloging purposes. If multimedia elements are used in the document, add this listing to the Abstract immediately after the keywords. For example - Multimedia Elements Used: JPEG (.jpg); Apple Quick Time (.mov); WAV (.wav). Type your name instead of signing the Abstract\
\
*Abstract:*\
\
*KEYWORDS:*\
_____________________.\
\
Student's Signature\
\
_____________________.\
\
Date\
\
\
### Abstract ###\
\
KEYWORDS: virtue ethics, virtue, practical reason, neo-Aristotelianism, happiness, eudaimonia, teleology, naturalism\
\
\
\
\
### Approval Page ###\
//	Type names of professors instead of including signatures\
\
**TITLE OF DISSERTATION**\
\
//	3 inches from top of page, centered, all in caps)\
\
By\
\
Keith E. D. Buhler\
\
\
\
__________________________________________\
Director of Dissertation\
\
\
__________________________________________\
Director of Graduate Studies\
\
__________________________________________\
Date\
\
\
\
### Dedication ###\
	// Optional. The information should be centered on this page; this page is not paginated. 4 inches from top.\
\
My wife Lindsay read almost every page of this dissertation before it went to print. Her background in philosophy, her zeal for excellence, and (what's more) her natural intellect allowed her to catch more errors and suggest more improvements to the argument and structure than any other single editor. Furthermore, she often made such corrections and suggestions with a babbling baby on her lap or (if the babies were asleep) made them when other sensible folks were asleep. While she may write her own dissertation one day soon, I can without exaggeration say that this is dissertation of mine in many ways belongs to her. In a real sense, I *owe* it to her, who followed me to Kentucky and in every way created our life together while I completed this labor. In gratitude, I offer it back to you. \
\
KEDB\
December, 2016\
\
#Acknowledgments (Optional)\
\
My thanks are owed to many people. Dr. David Bradshaw has been not only a professor but mentor from beginning to end. Dr. Gary Hartenburg was a helping hand to get me to graduate school. Dr. John Mark Reynolds first encouraged me to graduate school while teaching. \
\
My late father, Rich Buhler, unbeknownst to me, predicted that I would earn a PhD. He had two honorary doctorates but always underscored to me that an earned doctorate was different. I hope I have made him proud. \
\
My sister Kristi always believed in me and told me that one day I would be working as a professor. The first person who ordered me to go to graduate school was John Mark Reynolds. John Mark, I have finally fulfilled the plan we dreamed up. J. P. Moreland taught my first graduate school class in philosophy and used tough love and tough arguments to show me how hard and how rewarding this kind of research can be. \
\
David Bradshaw\'92s tireless, patient, gentle, and exacting academic leadership has shown me not only excellent scholarship but an excellent life. My first and final dialectical partner is Lindsay, whose conversations have been the school in which I have learned and still learn to love beauty and truth. \
\
\
### Table of Contents ###\
\
	This Table Of Contents Must Provide The Page Location Of \
The Acknowledgments, \
List Of Tables (If Included), \
List Of Figures (If Included), \
Each Chapter Or Section And Sub-Sections, \
As Well As Appendices, Bibliography/References, \
And Vita. 	\
\
\\tableofcontents\
\\setcounter\{tocdepth\}\{3\}}