{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ### Objections ###\
\
#### Relativism Objection ####\
\
Jonathan Swift was rightly comforted by being called 'a giant' in Lilliput but 'a midget' in Brobdingnag; the compresence of opposite insults is a good indicator that he was a perfectly sensible size. Likewise, MacIntyre should be comforted that he is pejoratively called a rationalist by the fideist and a fideist by the rationalists; he is called a progessive by traditionalists and a traditionalist by progressives; he is called far too liberal by conservatives and far too conservative by liberals. \
\
The most recurring objection to MacIntyre\'92s ethical philosophy is a cluster of worries about relativism. Ironically, and perhaps comfortingly, he is accused of being too relativistic and of being not being enough of a relativist. \
\
Briefly put, the worry is this: MacIntyre's virtue, it seems, is relative to practices, to communities, to institutions, or to \'93rival versions of moral enquiry\'94 \'97 in a word, virtue is relative to traditions. It is entirely possible for traditions to be incommensurable with each other. Hence, it is possible for conceptions of virtue to be incommensurable with each other. \
\
Acceptance of a tradition entails acceptance of *a* particular definition of virtue and list of virtues; denial of a tradition (or denial of *tradition itself*) entails the rejection of any definition of virtue and list of virtues. In light of this interpretation of his ethical theory, all MacIntyre has done is given a kind of anthropological account of what people from that group consider to be virtues, not what virtues *actually are*. The inquirer interested in, say, which tradition is *correct* or which version of moral enquiry is *correct* is at a loss. Call this \'93tradition relativism\'94 since it is different from cultural relativism or individualistic relativism. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 A charge of relativism, of course, only worries those philosophers (myself included) who think morality is in some sense "objective," binding, categorically obligatory, or universally prescriptive. Accusing a theory of relativism is only an \'93accusation\'94 if relativism is false; relativists rejoice. Such are not my primary audience. I shall assume that relativism is false or at least an undesirable conclusion, and treat the charge of relativism as an accusation that needs to be refuted lest it destroy MacIntyre's theory. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
The relativist of morality (and what\'92s more, the relativist of rationality) is not my primary audience, so I shall assume that relativism is false or at least an undesirable conclusion, and treat the charge of relativism as an accusation that needs to be refuted lest it destroy MacIntyre's theory. \
\
How do we make sense of this objection? First we have to stipulate what "relativism" is. Fully defining the constellation of (sometimes conflicting) positions that fly under that heading is no small task. Instead of attempting to adjudicate them, I shall follow Stephn Lutz: \'93Relativism\'94 is a conclusion of an enquiry to the effect that there are no truths free from contingent, historical conditions of the would-be knower.[@lutz2004tradition 66] To the relativist, the knower's individual or cultural perspective is both starting point and ending point of any enquiry. \
\
Now, MacIntyre denies relativism. Instead, he accepts the thesis that all of our inquiries, including our understanding of rationality itself, takes place within a cultural, historical, and traditional context. Following Lutz, we can say that MacIntyre accepts \'93relativity\'94.\
\
Relativity (a term borrowed from Michael Krausz[@krausz1984relativism]) is a thesis about *the condition of enquiry.* It is not a thesis about the *conclusion of enquiry.* Lutz approves of Mark Colby's statement that "argumentative situatedness is inescapable."[@lutz2004tradition 89] \
\
Such relativity, such situatedness, is compatible with objective or absolute or mind-independent or tradition-independent *truth*. It is incompatible with an objective or absoltue or tradition-independent *rationality*. From the historically- and socially-situated position of enquiry, a philosopher (he argues) may indeed find truth. In my terms, our contingent social, cultural, and individiaul perspective is an alpha point of every enquiry but is not the omega point of every enquiry. \
\
We might represent the options in this graph: \
\
| |relative          |             absolute | \
| Liberal Modernity | | alpha  omega | |\
| Nietzchean Postmodernity |    | alpha  omega |\
| Thomistic tradition |                 alpha | omega |\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 #### Truth and rationality ####\
\
The fundamental thesis behind MacIntyre's relativity is that truth is different from rationality. Truth is not simply "warranted assertability". It may be that the warranted assertion is (ultimately) false to reality, and it may be that what is asserted without warrant is (ultimately) true to reality. Truth is a matter of "adequation of the mind to the object." So adequation to the world as it is ultimately functions as a test of traditions. There are various rationalities; but admitting a plurality of rationalities does not necessitate admitting a plurality of truths. The plurality of rationalities can be "ranked" (though not of course by MacIntyre nor me) according to how adequately they capture the world as it is. \
\
MacIntyre's response is to distinguish between truth and rationality: \
\
>Rationality, understood within some particular tradition with its own specific conceptual scheme and problematic, as it always has been and will be, nevertheless requires *qua* rationality a recognition of the rational inadequacies of that tradition from its own point of view may at any time proved to be such that perhaps only the resources provided by some quite alien tradition ... Will enable us to identify and to understand the limits of our own tradition; in this provision may require that we transfer our allegiance to that hitherto alien tradition... [T]he platonic distinction between "is true" and "seems true to such and such person" turns out within such traditions to survive the recognition of the truth in relativism.[@macintyre1985relativism 191]\
\
But this is all pre-payment on a full response to the charge of relativism. Stating this charge adequately is important to both understanding and critiquing MacIntyre. I argue that several of his critics misunderstand the dialectic and criticize errors that *MacIntyre would agree are errors,* and errors he does not make. Others understand MacIntyre's position but are unwilling to join in the enquiry on the terms he lays out. Unwillingness to join an enquiry within which a theory is propounded is not, strictly speaking, an objection to that theory. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 #### Relativism Objection(s) ####\
\
Stephen Lutz summarizes nine objections that might fall under the heading of the \'93relativism objection.\'94[@lutz2004tradition 74ff.] Three of these are misunderstandings, three are justifiable questions that MacIntyre's theory, fully developed, can answer, and three are legitimate observations of the limits of MacIntyre's theory. Whether the identification amounts to a "critique" depends on whether those limits are *the actual limits* on enquiry. \
\
I shall briefly summarize Lutz' discussion of the first six criticisms before addressing more fully the last three. \
\
##### Feldmen #####\
\
1. That of Susan Feldman[@feldman1986objectivity] misinterprets MacIntyre\'92s project as a failed and incoherent attempt to resolve factious, subjective ethical disputes by judging them from an abstract, objective, ideal observer. But MacIntyre never explicitly presents his theory as an ideal observer theory; rather, he explicitly denies it. The ideal observer would have to *begin* the enquiry from the view from nowhere, which is impossible for us. MacIntyre just is not building -- not even *attempting* to build -- a procedural meta-ethics with which to adjudicate otherwise intractable normative disagreements. \
\
#### Wachbroit ####\
\
2. A second criticism is from Robet Wachbroit.  MacIntyre himself responded to Wachbroit in the second edition of *After Virtue*.[@wachbroit1984relativism] Wachbroit's worry is about the fundamental plurality of rationalities. He thinks MacIntyre faces a dilemma. Either MacIntyre himself writes from the view from nowhere, the Enlightenment objectivity, the archimedean point, or he writes from within the Aristotelian tradition. MacIntyre seems to get caught in this dilemma in sentences like these: "It scarcely needs repeating that it is the central thesis of *After Virtue* that the Aristotelian moral tradition is the best example we possess of a tradition whose adherents are entitled to a high measure of confidence in its epistemological and moral resources."[@@macintyre1984after 277] To whom does that 'we' refer? The dilemma, again, is that either 'we' are the Enlightened modern liberals or 'we' are the dyed-in-the-wool Aristotelians. On the first horn, if he writes from the view-from-nowhere, then MacIntyre is simply a modern meta-ethicist writing modern meta-ethics. He is criticizing liberalism from within the liberal tradition; he is borrowing the resources of the liberal definition of rationality to posit a theory in which no one definition of rationality has the resources to write books like *After Virtue*. On the second horn, if 'we' are card-carrying Aristotelians, it is trivial and almost tautologous to assert that 'we' take a high measure of confidence in Aristotelianism's epistemological and moral resources. Of course 'we' do! That kind of heady confidence that 'we' are up to standards arises within *each* tradition according to *that* tradition's own standards. \
\
Wachbroit misunderstands MacIntyre's theory ever so slightly here. MacIntyre can run through the horns of the dilemma. The 'we' need not be an ideal observer from a God's-eye point of view nor an Aristotelian already subsumed in the Aristotelian tradition. The 'we' can be those of us within broader western culture who have faced or might face the same kind of epistemological crisis that lead MacIntyre (and others) to critically evaluate the present state of western culture. The adherent of liberalism and the adherent of Aristotelianism share a common social, historical, and traditional root. Without too much difficulty, they can learn each other's conceptual vocabulary as a 'second language'. By self-reflecting upon the Enlightenment "branch" of the broader western tradition, and by facing up to its inadequacies and epistemological inconsistencies, the liberal adherent can test for him or herself whether the Aristotelian tradition has more resources for solving problems that are problems *by liberalism's own lights*. If, as MacIntyre did, such a person discovers that the Aristotelian has more resources for solving those problems, he or she might make rejoin with that older but no less thriving tradition. \
\
##### Colby Objection #####\
3. Mark Colby misunderstands MacIntyre's project as an attempt to develop a new, objective criterion of truth that will solve the problem of epistemological crisis, regardless of one's tradition. On Colby's reading, MacIntyre is a kind of pragmatist, where the truth is just the conclusion of a certain sort of rational enquiry. But MacIntyre denies this. The test of a traditon's rationality is its adequation to reality. Lutz illustrates this with the example of astronomy. \
\
> Ptolemaic astronomy lasted 1000 years because it solves a set of astronomical problems better than any of its opponents, including the heliocentric models of Aristarchus and Copernicus. Nevertheless, it did not adequately characterize the true nature of planetary motion and so under close evaluation it was plagued by inefficiencies that lead its adherents into a epistemological crisis. The theory that overcame Ptolemaic astronomy did so because it solved the astronomical problems or adequately than the Ptolemaic model, and it was confirmed by its predictive capacity. The fact that Kepler's astronomical model once subsumed into Newtonian physics, could predict novel facts provided confirmation that it was not only a clever description of a puzzling phenomenon, but a more adequate characterization of its object: the true nature of planetary motion.\
> what counts as progressiveness in the epistemological crisis resolution is improved adequacy to truths, but it pissed him logical crises only rise *within* traditions. Ptolemaic astronomers overcame *their* epistemological crisis when they abandoned *their own* geocentric beliefs Intertraditional considerations arise only when the adherents of one tradition are able to recongize in the resources of another tradition a more adequate solution to their own epistemological crisis. So progressiveness in epistemological crisis resolution cannot function as an intertraditional norm of rationality. This is no challenge to MacIntyre, however, because MacIntyre does not envision epistemological crisis as a tool for comparative ethics or meta-ethics.[@lutz2004tradition 91]\
\
As I understand Lutz' point here, Colby is conflating the attempt of an inquirer *within* a tradition to resolve his or her epistemological crisis through examining the resources of a rival tradition with the attempt of an inquirier *outside* both traditions to resolve "epistemological crisis" per se by developing an intertraditional or trans-traditional criterion of adequacy. MacIntyre thinks the former is possible (and happens often) but that the latter is impossible. \
\
##### Roque Objection #####\
4. Alicia Juarrero Roque surfaces another possible misinterpretation. MacIntyre claims that "comparison" between traditions is possible for an inquirer. But it is not possible by the attainment of an objective, context-free stance. Rather, each inquirier acquires a conceptual framework from his own tradition -- this is like a "first language." But each inquirer has the capacity to learn a "second first language". We can learn another conceptual framework philosophical imagination, through taking it *as if true* even before affirming it *as true*. Why do this? Usually because the inquirer's own tradition has failed him; he sees its inadequacies, he sees its problems and contradictions, he sees that it fails to live up to its own standards. MacIntyre describes what "rare gift of empathy" that this "philosophical imagination"[ makes possible: \'93\'85understand the theses, arguments, and concepts of their rival in such a way that they are able to view themselves from such an alien standpoint and to re-characterize their own beliefs in an appropriate manner from the alien perspective."[@macintyre1988whose 167]\
\
Roque's worry is that the capacity for learning a second first language is an innate, rational capacity that *all people share.* If so, then belief in such a capacity contradicts the definition of tradition-constituted rationality. If not, then the absence of such a capacity renders tradition comparison impossible. MacIntyre's response is flatly to deny this interpretation of his work. The "capacity" to learn another tradition as a "second first language" is a "rare gift of empathy" and in no way part of a supposed bundle of innate capacities. This rebuttal does not make such a capacity unproblematic; we still might wonder whether, for an given inquirer, that inquirer's estimation that he possesses the gift of empathy and philosophical imagination isn't just a re-statement of the trivial thought, "I think I am right."\
\
\
##### Evil practices #####\
\
Virtues exist only in the context of practices. Yet some practices seem to be evil. \
\
MacIntyre's earlier theory cannot overcome this objection, Lutz argues. He says:\
\
>Unfortunately, the relativism of *After Virtue* cannot be overcome unless its definitions of the virtues are extended to embrace the Aristotelian and Thomistic doctrine of the unity of virtue. Macs rejection of the unity of virtue in *After Virtue* has grave implications for the rest of his virtue theory because the rejection of the unity of virtue divroces the intellectual moral virtue of prudence from the passional moral virtues of courage, temperence, and justice... Prudence becomes cleverness. Courage and temperance are relativized, so that one could reasonable speak of the virtue of courage in a Nazi... Likewise, justice is reduced to some notion of fairness.[@lutz2004tradition 98]\
\
There have been ethical philosophers who endorse this kind of reductive virtue. Lutz mentions Edmund Pincoff as an "emotivist virtue theorist" (using "emotivist" in the narrower, MacIntyrean sense). Lutz continues by examining the implications of such a theory. Such a move has two main effects: (1) "It constitues the rejection of the Aristotelian practical syllogism that MacIntyre wanted to recover in *After Virtue* because it separates prudent reasoning from virtuous action. (2) It evacuates all falsifiable substantive moral content from the virtues, reducing them to enabling qualities."[@lutz2004tradition 100] The commonsense definition of "virtue" includes positive valence. A virtue is, within our tradition, a quality *admirable for its own sake* or else a quality that enables its bearer to *achieve admirable goals*. If a procedure results in a definition of virtue wherein even bad qualities or even good qualities that enable any given wicked goal, then the procedure has gone awry. \
\
In *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?*, MacIntyre explicitly retracts his earlier belief that virtues exist without a unity under prudence.[@macintyre1988whose preface, p. x] The consequences of this retraction, Lutz argues, are wide-ranging and crucial to refuting the charge of relativism. If virtues are unified, then even though virtues exist only in the context of practices, "no genuine practice can be inherently evil."[@lutz2004tradition 102] Rather, practical reason can judge *apparent goods* as genuine goods. The qualities needed for achieving the spurious goods internal to that "practice" would not be virtues but only *apparent virtues*. Now, such a definition certainly seems ad hoc. But Lutz provides a persuasive illustration: eugenics. Eugenics certainly seems to bear the markings of a genuine practice. Its apparent good is the purification of the gene pool for future generations. However, genuine virtues militate *against* the achievement of that goal. For example, Lutz cites a story of a Nazi doctor who had the virtue of compassion found himself unable to pursue the program of euthanizing mentally-disabled children. Even the doctor seemed disappointed with himself, asserting that he "approve[d]" state measures with conviction" but was "too gentle for this work... Heil Hitler!"[@@poliakov1979harvest 186-7] We might also recall Huck Finn's internal struggle with his "conscience" in *Adventures of Huckleberry Finn*.[@twain2014adventures Chapter 31] \
\
Huck decides to turn Jim in to the slave owners. He writes a letter outing Jim, and feels much better after "repenting" of his theft: \
\
>I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I had ever felt so in my life, and I knowed I could pray now. But I didn\'92t do it straight off, but laid the paper down and set there thinking\'97thinking how good it was all this happened so, and how near I come to being lost and going to hell...  \
\
After vividly confronting Jim's humanity, his goodness, and their loyal friendship, he wavers. \
\
>It was a difficult situation. I picked up the letter, and held it in my hand. I was trembling, because I knew had to make a choice between two things, and the outcome of my decision would last forever. I thought about it a minute while I held my breath. And then I said to myself: \'93All right, then, I\'92ll GO to hell"\'97and tore it up. It was awful thoughts and awful words, but they was said. And I let them stay said; and never thought no more about reforming. I shoved the whole thing out of my head, and said I would take up wickedness again, which was in my line, being brung up to it, and the other warn\'92t. And for a starter I would go to work and steal Jim out of slavery again; and if I could think up anything worse, I would do that, too; because as long as I was in, and in for good, I might as well go the whole hog.\
\
The humor of this passage arises, in large part, because of the tension between the *apparent good* of treating Jim as legal property and the *actual good* of treating Jim as an end in himself, as a free man just like any other. Huck's virtue (in this case, loyalty or friendship) *cannot* be put to use in the service of a corrupting practice like slave-trading. Just as vice subverts institutions and their worthy practices, virtue "subverts" vicious institutions and unworthy practices. Virtue marks the difference between the coward who disobeys his commanding officer's orders because the obedience would put him at risk of painful death and the courageous person who disobeys his commanding officer's order because obedience would require wrongdoing. Without prudence to discriminate between the two cases, we lack any resources by which to discriminate courage and cowardice, between a virtuous resistance and vicious resistance. \
\
MacIntyre's account satisfies two desideratum, which together form a paradoxical explanandum: his account explains why vices sometimes persist within pseudo-practices, institutions, and traditions from generation to generation, and it explains why practice-enabling virtues sometimes emerge to disrupt a pseudo-practice, a wicked institution, and a corrupt or at least incomplete tradition. The fact is that "many kinds of activities can be, and in fact are considered to be, practices. Some of these may conflict radically, owing to errors and insufficiences in rationlity."[@lutz2004tradition 103] Errors in rationality explain errors in traditions and hence misacriptions of the title 'virtue.' Rationality answers to truth, to the world as it is, not merely to the pragmatic reduction of truth to "dialectical success."[@lutz2004tradition 104] Hence, virtues answer to *what is really good*. They do not merely answer to "what-counts-as-good-for-us", which property is relative to each tradition. \
\
In this way, MacIntyre escapes this iteration of the charge of relativism, while still explaining why rival traditions differ -- and sometimes radically differ -- in their evaluations and opinions. Incomplete traditions can, and do, undergo crisis. Particular persons within that tradition discover and perseverate on inadequacies within the tradition, leading to an epistemological crisis. In response, others within the same tradition may become willing to examine the resources of rival traditions and either quit their primary tradition or re-fashion it, re-make it, update it, and make real moral and intellectual progress. \
\
### J. L. A. Garcia ###\
\
J. L. A. Garcia says that \'93MacIntyre\'92s rebuttal is as radical as it is ingenious. It is, in effect, to outrelativize the relativist. Rather than recoiling from relativism, as I understand his strategy, MacIntyre plunges so deeply into it, as we might say, to fall out the other side\'85 Contrary to what he sees as the relativist\'92s hasty and facile assumption, MacIntyre insists that it is not necessarily (nor always) the case that everyone is so situated that there is no position whose adoption *by her* at *any* time would be rationally superiors to some particular *set* of alternatives\'85Now the tables are turned, and it is the relativist who appears the dogmatist, claiming to know in advance and *a priori* that no one can be so situated.\'94 This all appears to me correct. MacIntyre uses the genealogist\'92s starting points to undercut the encyclopedist \'97 a move which implicitly approves of moral relativism. But he doesn\'92t stop there; he uses all the resources of intellectual history and contemporary natural and social sciences to defend some (but not all) of the beliefs and values of modernity, such as the value of democracy, the value of university education, the value of history, the belief in the possibility of scientific truth, the belief in progress \'97 a move which seems to endorse the Enlightenment and the liberal tradition as against the genealogists. To both, his challenge is to use the best resources of the past and the best rational resources of the present to defend a particular set of conclusions *as the best thus far*, as the *closest* to the truth. To both, his challenge is to defend a conception of morality and rationality *neither* claiming that any such conceptions are impossible *nor* claiming to have *concluded* the enquiry once and for all.\
\
 ### Relativism Objection Conclusion  ###\
\
    MacIntyre has responded to (and he thinks refuted) the charge of relativism multiple times, in his primary works and in \'93responses to critics.\'94 Yet for many, relativism stains the image of MacIntyre. Even after clarifying the obscure points of the dialectic MacIntyre does endorse, the objection can be resolved but not finally refuted. I would like to offer a suggestion as to why this is so. Rather, the resolution of the criticism can only come through self-reflection by the critics on themselves; hence MacIntyre\'92s dialectic, properly understood, invites even critics to self-reflection. This is a kind of *resolution* of the criticism. For, to accept this invitation is, in some sense, to join MacIntyre in the enquiry, which is to either lay down the criticism or persist in making it from a new vantage point within the enquiry. By contrast, to deny the invitation is not *strictly speaking an objection* but a sociological or psychological move, a decision not to become part of that enquiry. This not the \'93victory\'94 of the objection over MacIntyre\'92s theory, but a refusal to allow MacIntyre\'92s theory to define the terms of the enquiry. \
}