{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ### What if there are no ends in nature? ##\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
One powerful objection to the recovery of telos is that there is no teleology in nature. There are no *ends* (\uc0\u964 \u949 \u955 \u959 \u953 ). Call this position *teleological nihilism.* There are two forms of teleological nihilism: extreme and moderate. Extreme teleological nihilism we may call the view that there are no "purposes" or natural ends anywhere in the world *including* in human actions. Even our practices, behaviors, and lives are purposeless, even to ourselves. Moderate teleological nihilism we may call the view that there are no natural purposes *except* those in human actions, intentions, and societies, etc. On moderate teleological nihilism, human purposes are not instances of a broader category that includes the tendency of an acorn to become an oak and the tendency of deer to survive and reproduce; human purposes are sui generis phenomena that spontaneously emerge out of our brains at a certain level of complexity. Final causation thinking is then projected out onto the world by us; we observe that the beaver gathered wood and that the beaver built a dam and we say "the beaver gathered wood *in order to* build the dam." But really the beaver did no such thing. This is what philosopher of biology Ernst Mayr calls "teleonomic" natural behavior, but not genuinely teleological.[@mayr1992teleology] \
\
Teleological nihilism claims as its evidence *modern science* as a whole. Natural sciences have dismissed the notion of final causation for three or four centuries now and have gotten along well without it. In fact, natural sciences and the experimental, empirical methods that advance them have progressed far more than anyone could have dreamed. In part, this success is the result of giving up magical thinking. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ### What if ends are reducible? ###\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
Teleoreductionism has taken one of two popular forms: \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
the first reduces 'teleonomic' (that is, apparently teleological) biological functions to causal contributions to a system and the second reduces teleonomic biological functions to naturally selected effects. A proponent of the first reduction is Donald Davidson; a proponent of the second is Ruth Millikan. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\slleading20\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ### Reducible reply ###\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\slleading20\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
Neither forms of 'teleoreduction' can account for the normativity of the biological function in question. If hearts simply cause %%\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\slleading20
\cf0 James Barham elaborates:\
\
>I was aware of well-known criticisms of both of the then-current reductionist accounts of function: the "causal-role" theory and the Darwin-inspired "selected-effects" theory. In a nutshell, the problem is that neither theory can explain the 
\i normative
\i0  character of biological processes in a coherent manner. (Biological processes are "normative" in the sense that they may either 
\i succeed
\i0 or 
\i fail
\i0  in fulfilling their functions.) With respect to the "causal-role" theory, there is no way to distinguish between functional and non-functional parts of a biological system without presupposing the normative character of the overall system as a whole -- which begs the question at issue.\
>With respect to the "selected-effects" theory, the problem is that selection history is conceptually irrelevant to the identification of function. True, it has a role to play in explaining how present-day functions have come to exist. But selection history cannot possibly explain what it is about a biological process that constitutes it 
\i as
\i0  a function. This is a logical point that Darwinists simply miss. The reason is that our 
\i concept
\i0  of function in no way depends on evolutionary history. If it did, then biologists like Aristotle, Galen, Harvey, and innumerable others who lived long before Darwin would not have had the means to identify the functions of organs, which they of course did. Sometimes, they got it wrong, as when Aristotle placed the seat of perception and thought in the heart, instead of the brain (though some of his predecessors got it right). But Aristotle's mistake was due to his inadequate knowledge of physiology, not to his ignorance of evolution.\
\
Millikan bites the bullet on this objection. She isn't trying to do "conceptual analysis" of the term 'function.' She is willing to admit that her concept of proper function only applies to functional objects with histories and that hypothetical counterexamples involving functional objects without histories prove that two objects with one and the same "*mark* of purposiveness" can have different functions.[\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\slleading20\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\slleading20\pardirnatural
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\slleading20\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ### No Telos Reply ###\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\slleading20\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
\
\
### Biological Teleology\
\
Teleological realism in biology is making a come-back. There are those who protest teleological nihilism. Arnhart persuasively argues that teleology is assumed in medicine.[@arnhart1988] Zammito clarifies ongoing relevance in biology, since organisms seem to be intrinsically purposeful.[@zammito2006teleology]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\slleading20\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
In a series of important articles and books over the past decade or so, Bedau (1990, 1992a, 1992b, 1993), Cameron (2004), Christensen & Bickhard (2002), Jacobs (1986), Manning (1997), Maund (2000), McLaughlin (2001, 2009), Mossio et al. (2009), Mundale & Bechtel (1996), Nanay (2010), Nissen (1997), Perovic (2007), Walsh (2006), and Zammito (2006) have cast grave doubt on the coherence of any reductive analysis of function. Some of these authors (e.g., Jacobs, Maund, Zammito) call explicitly for a reconsideration of the possibility that teleological phenomena in biology might be both objectively real and irreducible. \
\
The very word 'teleology' is liable to sound quaint to modern ears. Barnham clarifes the range of terms that denote identical or similar concepts: \
\
>"By \'93teleology,\'94 I have in mind such words and concepts as \'93purpose,\'94 \'93end,\'94 \'93goal,\'94 \'93function,\'94 \'93control,\'94 and \'93regulation,\'94 as well as the real- world biological phenomena to which these words and concepts refer. This means that the word \'93teleology\'94 should always be construed here in its internal or \'93immanent\'94 sense\'97purposiveness existing in living beings themselves\'97and never in its external or \'93transcendent\'94 sense of an overarching cosmic principle" (Barnham 1). For a similar distinction, see Lennox (1992) and Brown (2001). \
\
We can add "purposive" and "goal-directed" to the constellation of concepts in the offing. \
\
#### Kinds of teleology ####\
\
// There are some distinctions I've already drawn up in an earlier draft. Insert those here. \
}