{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
*Telos* is of course Greek for "end", though the word is bursting with dizzying array of possible meanings, including "definite point", "goal", "purpose," "cessation," "order," "prize," "highest point", "realization", "decision", and "services."[@liddell1896intermediate compare with Strong's 5056: "telos tel'-os from a primary tello (to set out for a definite point or goal); properly, the point aimed at as a limit, i.e. (by implication) the conclusion of an act or state (termination (literally, figuratively or indefinitely), result (immediate, ultimate or prophetic), purpose); specially, an impost or levy (as paid); continual, custom, end(-ing), finally, uttermost."]\
\
For the remainder of this section, I shall use the term 'end-directed' to describe the behavior of individuals and systems instead of exclusively using '*telos*'' or 'teleology'. 'End-directed' is passive voice and so seems to me neutral with respect to *intentional* versus *non-intentional* movement, and neutral with respect to whether *purposeful* end or some other kind of natural, necessary, or luck-based end. \
\
There are at least two kinds of teleology we can distinguish between: social (or intentional) and natural (or unintentional).[@barham2011] We can divide up each kind into sub-kinds as follows:\
\
1. Natural teleology (organs, limbs) - eyes, hearts, bacterial flagella are end-directed; \
2. Natural teleology (whole organisms) - individual organisms are end-directed; \
3. Social teleology (individual) - human rational agency is essentially end-directed;\
4. Social teleology (group) - social groups engage in intentional end-directed behavior;\
\
Hearts pump blood; flagella move bacteria; eyes see. That is, eyes are *supposed to* see; they are "designed" to see. At least they manifest the appearance of design. They were "naturally preserved" because they see. All of these statements ascribe a end-directed behavior to organs. \
\
To ascribe "purposes" to, say, bacteria seems silly. However, to ascribe to bacteria natural end-directed behavior -- namely chemotaxis.[@barham2011 18] As James Barham explains, chemotaxis is the process by which a bacterium pursues and dallies in favorable environments and "flees" unfavorable ones. Empirical observation is enough to illuminate that (normal, non-defective) bacteria direct themselves toward the end of survival. \
\
Purposeful, intentional, end-directed behavior seems an ineliminably *mental* activity. To ascribe to a human being purposes held "before the mind" is anything but silly; it is a reality with which we are acquianted almost every waking moment of our lives. But we have individual purposes and group purposes. The end-directed behavior of a football team is to win, to score more points; the end-directed behavior of each player is different -- one is to run the ball, the other to block, the other to intercept the ball, etc. The goal of the team, we might say, supervenes on the goals of the individual players. Similarly, the goal of a community (say, a church or a university) is distinct from the goals of the individual members of that community. \
\
We should mention for the sake of thoroughness a possible sixth kind of natural teleology. Call it "Cosmic teleology" -- the grand system of all systems. Some thinkers (especially religious thinkers) have thought that all of the cosmos displays a kind of end-directed behavior. On this view, the individual actions of organisms on earth, the cosmic radiation of the stars in our galaxy, the almost infinitely complex relations of gravity and radiation between our galaxy and others, all work together in a kind of symphonic activity with its own, supervenient *telos*. While it is hard to imagine such an end-directed activity without an intelligent being to guide the process, not *all* those who endorse this kind of "cosmic teleology" were theists. Fate, chance, or simply the concatenation of natural laws might be posited to explain how and why everything is going a particular direction. Thomas Nagel, for example, posits (atheistic) natural teleological laws to explain the evolution of the cosmos from non-mental to mental.[@nagel2012mind]}