Bradshaw: Thanks to everyone for coming. So let's begin. Keith, why don't you start out by saying a few words and then we will go around with our questions.

Buhler: Sure. So my goal in this dissertation was to explain why everyone has an obligation to become wise. I started out writing about virtue in the Aristotelian tradition: for Aristotle, you know, there are both moral virtues and intellectual virtues since human beings have a complex psychology, both emotions and reason. Human virtue is the excellence of human nature. The project quickly became about the metaethical negotation between Philippa Foot and John McDowell on this question of what is 'natural.' Foot basically represents a modern, updated version of Aristotle's view that she thinks is compatible with modern science. McDowell represents the opposing view, that modern science is somehow *incompatible* with Aristotle's view of virtue and nature. So I asked myself whether someone could assume scientific naturalism to be true and still be a moral realist about traditional virtues like moderation and practical wisdom. I think Foot answers that question in the affirmative: even on scientific naturalism, including a moderate scientific realism, human beings are what I call "practical, rational primates" -- my own formulation of the old phrase "rational animal". We can describe human beings with generic statements, which are a special form of judgment unlike universal and particular judgments -- they are formal or generic. And generics are normative/descriptive. They give us fundamentally normative insights into natural norms. There are natural norms followed by all organisms, human beings included. So the natural human norms are norms of virtue and practical reason. That's how I argue that we can move from statements like: "I am a human being. Therefore, I ought to be wise." Acquiring virtue and wisdom is a process, of course. So I call the project "becoming what we are". We need time and effort and, frankly, wisdom to become what we are, to actualize our human life form. So that's what I trued to argue. 

