
## A Thesis

Can morality be justified by 
This dissertation defense the thesis that some evaluative judgments -- such as that 'virtues are beneficial for humans' and that 'wisdom is a virtue' -- true and can be known to be true by examining human nature, which is practical, rational animals.

If true, this thesis has a couple of significant consequences. 

The first is that divine commands are not *necessary* for the discovery of and justification of at least these moral judgments. In one sense, it is possible to be morally good (read: virtuous and practically wise) whether or not one has correct beliefs about God. The second significant consequence is that some iteration of naturalism is correct. I construe 'naturalism' very broadly, as a set of doctrines and methods reflecting on what is natural including human nature -- but then again, 'naturalism' is so multiply ambiguous this may not be a significant consequence after all. 

Both of these entailments deserve comment. Each, in fact, deserves a chapter below. 

The defense of my main thesis and its relation to these two consequences proceeds by way of overcoming objections. As paradoxical as it may seem, I anticipate that the objections will be from two quarters: first, that my view is too "naturalistic", or not naturalistic enough for some readers; and second, that my view is to too secular, or not secular enough. 

The defense takes the form of the following Chapters.

**Virtue: Chapter 1** will provide an primary ethical argument that the virtues are necessary for man as such (using man of course in its gender inclusive sense). By 'the virtues' I mean at least justice, courage, moderation, and practical wisdom -- but possibly more. And by 'necessary' I mean *necessary for* human flourishing. I shall define human flourishing more exactly in a later chapter; I mean to gesture at human well-being, true happiness, human success as such, etc. all of which I take to be virtually synonymous and all of which I will certainly treat here as synonymous. Put negatively, the thesis of this chapter is that vices necessarily contribute to misery, unhappiness, and human stultification and stagnation. Human nature is the starting point, flourishing is the goal, and the moral and intellectual virtues are the means by which we move from start to goal. The remaining chapters address objections to this primary thesis. 

**Practical Reason and Practical Wisdom: Chapter 2** defends one of the core assumptions of the case that virtues are necessary for man: namely, that there is such a thing as human nature. Man has a nature that is discernible; his nature is that of practical rational animals. Wisdom is, therefore, the supreme virtue necessary for human flourishing. Chapter 2 defends this thought against objections from Darwinism from metaphysical skepticism of a certain sort, that there is no human nature, or that if there is, that it is "a mess," or that I even if it's there is, we cannot know what it is. All of which if they were true would render impossible the kinds of moral judgments based on human nature. Chapter 2 also defends the form of naturalism that will be at stake here, namely one in which (in important ways) nature includes normativity, and normativity is natural. The specter of the naturalistic fallacy is flushed from its hiding place and exorcised.

**Teleology: Chapter 3** defends a particular conception of happiness. Namely, happiness is the natural *telos* of humans as such. The thesis that human nature even exists has already been argued. But it is a view of human nature that depends on, and supports, teleological realism about biology. I distinguish between destiny (which is inevitable and determined) and destination (which is not inevitable and not determined). Health, wealth, and reproduction are goals of most people in most places at most times. But Happiness with a capital "H" is the implicit destination of humanity as a species. A conception of happiness  both in this world definitely and potentially beyond this world. But if there is no beyond, the happiness does not even change. 

**Nature: Chapter 4** cleans up some various objections. First, it argues that 'naturalism' as it very often appears in our philosophical literature is virtually useless. My position will inevitably be characterized by some friends and foes as a form of naturalism. However, to say naturalism is correct is about as meaningful as to say that empires are Imperial. For many philosophers, naturalism is defined in tautologous terms. So unimportant task will be to shakedown one of our vaguest and most useless philosophical bagaboos. 'Naturalism', weather a weapon or term of endearment, is fatally vague, admitting of no less than 16 substantive distinct and sometimes incompatible positions. My thesis that evaluative judgments can be discerned from examining human nature is commonly labeled 'neo-Aristotelian naturalism', but I am comfortable with the label neo-Stoic naturalism, simply naturalism, and I am comfortable throwing out the label altogether in favor of a restatement of the core thesis. Secondly, it addresses objections from theists who might worry that my thesis is an affirmative answer to the question can one be good without God. Now, divine commands maybe sufficient to make known and to justify true evaluative judgments, but they're not *necessary*. And there maybe other, perhaps more specific moral judgments, moral truths, for which thorough exploration of our human nature and reflection are not adequate and for which divine commands are necessary. So it is no counterexample to my thesis that say God commands Abraham to sacrifice his son Isaac and that no earthly wisdom would have revealed to Abraham but that was the thing to do at that moment. It would be a counterexample to my thesis that say some cultures in history did not know that (say) *honesty was a virtue* until a divine command revealed this basic moral truth to them.

