{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 McDowell, \'93Virtue and Reason\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 Overview:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 McDowell is attempting to prove that virtues are ethical qualities that only make sense \'91from within\'92, that they lend a certain kind of perceptive ability to their bearers. \
\
His main opponent is the notion that morality can be adduced from an objective third-person sort of view. This objection bases itself on the analogy to deductive reasoning, which follows strict rules and succeeds on the basis of allegedly objective rules \'93out there\'94 for us to discover and follow. \
\
His rebuttal is to deny that deductive reasoning is so objective. Rather, deductive reasoning is not rule-following, except in that we follow a vague collection of rules associated by our common forms of life. We only know deduction, too, from within. So moral reasoning, he avers, we also know from within, by doing it, while doing it, because of our common forms of life. He does not much advance a view of virtue beyond the Aristotelian notion that virtues are qualities of reliable good-choosing, good-acting. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Synopsis:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Reflections:\
}