{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red35\green38\blue42;\red68\green68\blue68;\red26\green26\blue26;
\red140\green21\blue21;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat143\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid5}
{\list\listtemplateid6\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid501\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid6}
{\list\listtemplateid7\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid601\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid7}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}{\listoverride\listid6\listoverridecount0\ls6}{\listoverride\listid7\listoverridecount0\ls7}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Philosopher Summary Sheet\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 H1: If value is real, then it is natural. 
\i The crux of much metaethics today
\i0 \
1. It is real and not natural, so H is false. (Moore, Shaffer-Landeau) 
\i Deny the conditional
\i0 \
2. Value is real. Therefore it is natural. (Railton, Boyd) 
\i Affirm the antecedent
\i0 \
3. Value is not natural. Therefore it is not real. (Mackie, Ayer) 
\i Deny the consequent
\i0 \
\ls1\ilvl0
\i \
\ls1\ilvl0
\i0 H2: Morality, moral law, goodness, duty are known by practical reason. (
\i Kant\'92s 2nd Critique)
\i0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 1.	Either morality is practical rationality or practical irrationality. \
2.	If it is practical irrationality, then the good can only be known by mystical insight (nonnaturalism or supernaturalism, Moore). \
3.	The good cannot be known by mystical insight.\
4.	So morality is practical rationality. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 1.	If morality is practical rationality, it is either pure or applied.\
2.	If it is applied, then the good becomes confused with (identified with) pleasure. (naturalism or empiricism, Railton), and morality is an instrument for attaining the most pleasure.\
3.	But the good is not identical to pleasure.\
4.	So morality is not applied practical rationality. \
5.	So morality is pure practical rationality. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 \
\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf0 1.	G.E. Moore\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Moore is the first of a certain sort of ethical \'91nonnaturalist.\'92 An Englishman and one-time editor of 
\i Mind, 
\i0 he was a co-founder with Russell, Wittgenstein, and Frege of the analytic tradition. He studied Classics at at Trinity College in Oxford before Russell and J.M.E. McTaggart encouraged him to study philosophy as well, so his writings show familiarity and love of Plato and other ancients. In his 
\i Principia Ethica, 
\i0 he sets the terms for many of the issues in metaethics debated today. (His \'93Refutation of Idealism\'94 and \'93Defence of Common Sense\'94 and \'93Proof of the External World\'94 advance clever \'91common sense\'92 or intuitive arguments against nonintuitive philosophical doctrine of idealism \'97 the doctrines of McTaggart and F.H. Bradley.) In 
\i Principia Ethica, 
\i0 his primary contention is that goodness is an undefinable, intuitable, nonnatural property. It is undefinable in any other terms than goodness, least of all other \'91natural\'92 terms like pleasure or being. In order to refute attempts to define goodness as some other entity that is in nature or metaphysics, he spends considerable time discussing Mill, Hegel, and Plato. Goodness 
\i can 
\i0 however be known, like \'93yellowness\'94; it can be intuited. Goodness can only be shown and grasped, not defined. We can intuit intrinsic goodness and know that it is worth producing or bringing about, and this knowing is apart from proof or disproof. Knowing goodness is not of a kind with empirical knowledge of sensibles nor metaphysical knowledge of \'91truths of reason.\'92 Ethics, then, is an autonomous discipline that does not owe its first principles to natural science nor metaphysics. Moore is also a certain sort of consequentialist, since he thinks that whatever actions bring about beauty and awareness of beauty (which are intrinsically preferable or worth bringing about) are worth doing. The best action produces the best outcome. Since predicting the best outcome is always a matter of probabilities, not certainties, ethics is a probabilistic discipline. \'93Organic unities\'94 or organic wholes are central to his conception of goodness. The organic whole, for instance, of a beautiful scene and my awareness of it, are worth bringing about, and cannot be broken apart by arguing that 
\i merely 
\i0 the awareness of beauty is good. Awareness or knowledge of beauty has little intrinsic value, but as a part of an organic whole, has great value as that part.\
\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf0 2.	Elizabeth Anscombe\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Anscombe, a disciple and friend of Wittgenstein, is the first of a certain sort of modern virtue ethicist. In addition to translating Wittgenstein, she contributed to philosophy of action and ethics as well as other areas; she contributed interesting arguments in war theory and sexual ethics. In metaethics, she was against consequentialism (and coined the term) and argued that intention had a necessary practical and theoretical role in ethical reasoning. Especially in her essay on \'93Modern Moral Philosophies,\'94 she starkly contrasts all law-based and virtue-based accounts of the good life with all modern secular moral philosophies, especially Mill, Hume, and Kant. These latter invoke notions of \'91ought\'92 and \'91should\'92 that only make sense within an older foundation of divine legality, which their secular proponents eschew. If I or my community or my species are in a historical relationship with God, then of course there are obligations (and moral obligations) on what I ought or ought not do. Leaving divine law aside, notions of \'91ought\'92 and \'91should\'92 centered around the conception of a good human life and human virtues contributing thereto. These notions of justice, courage, etc. are an alternative to legalism, and so for the secular person the only option. Anscombe strenuously rejected consequentialism of all forms, since some bad actions (such as torturing babies for fun) can be known as bad apart from and prior to any consequences. Since 1958, a new and growing field of virtue ethics within professional normative ethics and metaethics and even in non-professional discourse (cf. the TED talk of Barry Schwartz\'92, a medical doctor, and 
\i If Aristotle Ran General Motors 
\i0 by Tom Morris.) Her primary contention in that work is that modern moral philosophies are predicated on errors and are thus false, while most of us do not ascribe to the divine law theory of ethics which grounds right and wrong in the decree of a god \'97 but that the only alternative to divine law is Aristotle\'92s virtue account. Some have taken her to be denying Aristotle and thus affirming (by implication) divine law. Some have taken her to be denying divine law accounts and thus affirming virtue. Others have taken her more at her word, that her very thesis is a conditional proposition: 
\i if not divine law, 
\i0 then virtue. The dilemma, and not either horn, is the conclusion of  her powerful argument. Her critique of Kant is that the notion of self-legislation, when it comes to moral laws, does not make sense, since an obligation is by definition something that is binding on one even if one wishes to change it. Her critique of Mill, in short, is that he and his followers would have to endorse the performance of obvious monstrosities, or that they cannot consistently and clearly say why not to endorse monstrosities. \
\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf0 3.	Philippa Foot\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Foot is a disciple of Anscombe and, second-hand, of Wittgenstein. She died in 2010. Her lifelong oeuvre is focussed primarily on ethics and metaethics. Though her views changed over the course of her life, her metaethical stance is that of cognitivism and virtue ethics. She argues against Ayer, Stevenson, and Hare and who she considered to be their predecessor, Moore, in relegating ethical concepts to a subrational realm. By contrast, \'91thick\'92 moral concepts run afoul of a strict and untenable fact/value distinction, since they intrinsically combine evaluative and descriptive elements.  Interestingly, she is a naturalist in some sense of the word. Her later work (
\i Natural Goodness) 
\i0 continues on the theme of notions that include both factual and evaluative elements. Aristotelian categorical statements like \'93humans have 32 teeth\'94 (or \'93penguins keep their eggs warm\'94) are neither universal (since there are exceptions) nor particular (since they are normative). Normal humans have that many teeth, baring dysfunction, injury, or sickness. Well-functioning, normal penguins act this way, and all penguins 
\i should 
\i0 act this way if they are to preserve their species and flourish qua animals. These evaluative judgments reflect a knowledge of a particular species\'92 \'91nature\'92. \
Along similar lines, disagreeing with Moore (in her first chapter of 
\i Natural Goodness
\i0 ), she argues that the predicate \'91good\'92 functions differently than the predicates \'91yellow\'92 or \'91red,\'92 since \'91good\'92 always needs a complement \'97 \'91good for\'92 or \'91good as.\'92 A good house is not good simpliciter but good for some person in some situation (say, a mother of six). \
Virtues are those human qualities that are good for human life. Virtues enable and contribute to the species-specific flourishing of individuals and communities. Flourishing includes survival, reproduction, the presence of human-specific pleasure (or absence of pain), and community functioning. For this reason, the good thing to do for us is in the domain of human practical reason: our rationality and practical rationality are part of our nature qua humans. \
How this conception of nature meshes (or doesn\'92t mesh) with a non-Aristotelian account of nature is a subject of some debate (cf. James Lenman\'92s article in the SEP). Humans also \'91by nature\'92 seem to be very different from animals in morally neutral or morally negative ways \'97 so how does one accurately identify the Aristotelian categoricals that are true of (and normatively true) of the way \'91well-functioning\'92 humans are? The eating of other animals or abstention therefrom provides a test case. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 	This problem comes up in discussions of natural law. Aquinas, for instance, has a whole range of natural goods like individual survival and health, to formation of family and reproduction, to the formation of larger communities with arts and functions, to the culmination of religious worship. Are they ranked? By complexity, yes; by value, not necessarily. What is one to do in cases of conflict between various levels of human goods? There are lots of kinds of pleasure, and they are not commensurate. \
	Aristotle recognizes these questions but does not take that to be his job to answer them. The 
\i phronemos 
\i0 is the standard; the wise man is the judge. He gives a formula of temperence, using bodily pleasure in the right way and right time, etc. But that is a schema. To find out what temperence looks like you have to look at the temperate man. That is circular, but not necessarily viciously circular. Moral perception, as in McDowell, comes into the conversation here. The question of whether and whose moral perception is warranted is a problem for ethics. \
\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf0 4.	Thomas Nagel\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Thomas Nagel is a major player in philosophy of law, mind, politics, and ethics. He studied under John Rawls. His writings are also more often reviewed in popular popular and \'93middle-brow\'94 publications (introduction to philosophy classes, newspapers, blogs, etc.) than many philosophers. His most popular critique of reductionism in consciousness is the \'93What Is it Like to Be a Bat?\'94 essay (1974), where he argues that there is something 
\i it is like 
\i0 to be a creature, to \'93have a subjective mental or experiential point of view\'94 (Van Lulick, Robert, \'93Consciousness,\'94 
\i Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
\i0 ). His favorite recurring theme is the distinction, interplay, and often tension between the subjective (first-person) and the objective (third-person) points of view.  This is the explicit theme of his 
\i The View from Nowhere
\i0 , which ranges over the gamut of major philosophical areas, including mind,, mind/body, knowledge, thought, freedom, value, ethics, and the meaning of life. But the same theme recurs in many of his writings, including his most recent (as of 2014) 
\i Mind and Cosmos
\i0 , which defends the subjective point of view (even a realist account of rationality and morality) against the overweening pressure of reductive neo-Darwinian physicalist accounts shrilly demanding a third-person account of the whole cosmos, including human minds and communities. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 \
Nagel\'92s ethics are realistic, rationalistic, and naturalistic. He does not emphasis virtue ethics. He is a realist in that he thinks there are moral facts and objective ethical concerns that motivate or ought to motivate behavior for every rational agent. He views moral or ethical reasoning as a species of practical reasoning. Practical reason includes both prudential (self-interested) behavior and altruistic (other-interested) behavior. He is a naturalist, in one sense of the word. He argues (in 
\i Mind and Cosmos 
\i0 especially) that \'91naturalism\'92 and hence \'91nature\'92 needs to be defined to include both physical stuff and subjective, conscious stuff. He argues (in 
\i Last Word, View from Nowhere, 
\i0 and 
\i Mind and Cosmos
\i0 ) that the domain of ethical truths is independent of any other domain, like biology, psychology, or mathematics. Each domain has first principles (my term, not his) and chains of deductions entailing more specific conclusions within that domain. No domain is beholden to the others to justify its terms and premises by the terms and premises of another: just as mathematicians are not beholden to give justification for their theorems in the terms of biological science, nor vice versa, ethicists are not beholden to give justifications for their theorems in the terms of natural science.Values are real and sufficient justifications for acting on one\'92s own or anothers behalf. \'93Agent-neutral\'94 values are reasons for any and every agent.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\qj
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1\qj
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 Nagel also contributed to the popularizing of the term \'93moral luck\'94 and has argued that those conditions of life over which we have no control (our birth, place in history, location, family, health, and many other aspects of life) affect our \'93moral standing.\'94In contrast to the intuitive notion that everyone is responsible for his or her actions and character, regardless of life conditions. \'93\cf2 Prior to reflection it is intuitively plausible that people cannot be morally assessed for what is not their fault, or for what is due to factors beyond their control.\'94 (Nagel, 1993, p. 58)\cf0 \
\ls4\ilvl0\cf2 \
Nagel has also argued for the \'93fragmentation\'94 of value, that there are multiple valid, competing systems of value with no one overarching system (like morality). According to Adams, \'93This is the title of chapter {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.oxfordscholarship.com.ezproxy.uky.edu/view/10.1093/0195153715.001.0001/acprof-9780195153712-chapter-10#"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 9}} of Nagel, 
\i Mortal Questions
\i0 . Related ideas are found in Williams, 
\i Moral Luck
\i0 , chaps. 1, 2, and 5, and in the discussion of \'93admirable immorality,\'94 in Slote, 
\i Goods and Virtues
\i0 , chap. 4.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf0 5.	John McDowell\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 John McDowell writes on all major areas of philosophy, especially metaphysics, epistemology, mind, and language. His favorite interlocutors are both ancient (Plato, Aristotle) and modern (Wittgenstein, Kant). McDowell is a type of philosophical quietist in that he does not want to or aim to develop a positive metaphysics, only to dissolve the apparent problems that crop up in the psyches of modern philosophers. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 His orientation towards value is not reductively naturalistic but is not supernaturalist. He thinks \'93bald naturalism\'94 is unjustified and false, while \'93supernaturalism\'94 on the other extreme is scary and threatening. In between sits \'93second nature\'94 or a \'93relaxed naturalism\'94 that includes human capacities for active/receptive rational thought and practical reason, including our \'93sensitivity to reasons\'94 both theoretical and practical. In this space is virtue. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 McDowell argues that ethics must start not with good acts or rules but with good characters \'97 with virtue. In \'93Virtue and Reason\'94 (1979) he argues virtue is a sort of knowledge: knowledge of what ought to be done. Regardless of whether the proper motivation exists, the virtuous person 
\i sees 
\i0 the world differently than the immoralist. On motivation McDowell agrees with Nagel that a belief about the moral facts perceived justify an action 
\i and 
\i0 a desire. There can be unjustified desires and justified desires. Contra Hume, who thought both belief and desire necessary to explain (and to justify) an action, they think desire might help 
\i explain
\i0  but does not help justify an action. He also argues that the practical reason that constitutes what ought to be done is not \'91objective\'92 in the sense that it can be seen from outside the perspective of virtue nor that it can be justified by appeal to third-person \'91scientific\'92 (bald naturalistic) perspective. Virtuous living has an overall aim of a kind of life. Virtuous living is not mere rule-following like deduction appears to be mere mechanical rule following. But then again, deduction is not mere mechanical rule following. Both are intersubjective and rooted in our forms of life. Following Wittgenstein, the activity that can be expressed as rule-following but not 
\i reduced to 
\i0 rule-following is rooted in our \'91forms of life\'92 \'97 our social condition, our participation in custom, practice, or institution. There is no Platonic reality to which these customs or practices answer and correspond. Even so, they are objective enough to justify our ordinary use of the term; intersubjectivity is sufficient to ground our need for objectivity. Similarly to Nagel, he critiques expressivism and projectivism as misinterpretations of the \'93obvious fact that ethical... thinking is not science.\'94 So he is not an anti-realist, but he is not a realist. He is not exactly an idealist, either. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 One of McDowell\'92s own contributions to metaethics is in advancing \'91sensibility theory.\'92 Moral properties are secondary properties, like colour. Rather than asserting straightforward realism (moral facts are out there) McDowell thinks that value properties do cause us (those of us properly disposed) to have certain beliefs. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 McDowell argues (in \'93Are Moral Requirements Hypothetical Imperatives?\'94) against Foot\'92s early essay \'93Morality as a System of Hypothetical Imperatives\'94 (the main thesis of which she herself later disavows). He thinks that one can without irrationality question whether one should act as morality requires, but disagrees with the inference that therefore moral requirements are hypothetical (and not categorical) imperatives. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf0 6.	Richard Rorty\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Rorty claims to be a pragmatist and a naturalist. He denies (especially in \'93Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature\'94 (1979) the traditional notion that knowledge is representation of a mind-independent world. He diagnoses Plato as suffering from this error and as well as analytic philosophy (even when critical of Plato). The alternative is a mixture of Dewey, Hegel, and Darwin that puts epistemology, metaphysics, and science alike firmly in the intersubjective position of etiquette, language, and so on \'97 all of which are liable to social progress in history. There are no givens, no objective starting points, either from empirical or theoretical insight; there is only \'93what society lets us say\'94 (\'93Philosophy as Mirror of Nature\'94 174). If this is so, then there is no metaphysics and there is no science. At least there is no metaphysics and no science as they are traditionally (optimistically) construed \'97 getting at the real world and matching up our concepts and terms to that reality. (In this way Rorty\'92s naturalism eschews scientism as radically as it eschews religious fundamentalism.) \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 \
What is left is not \'93mere subjectivism\'94 where there are no constraints on belief and action but constraints internal to the conversation and behavior of the participants. These constraints are liable to change and hence to \'93progress\'94 \'97 which for Rorty is increasingly democratic and secular society.  He thinks that progress can and should be made in democracy, solidarity, reducing suffering and cruelty, but that these changes will come about not by approximation to truth or goodness but by changing our vocabularies, even though we know that the change is not really significant. We realize that the \'93redescriptions\'94 of problems and social conditions will not come \'93closer\'94 to God, nature, an ideal method, or any other standard, but even in so realizing we come closer to a secular humanism. \
\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf0 7.	J.L. Mackie\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Mackie is an anti-realist and the first (of the modern sort of) error-theorist. He argues that all declarative statements with value predicates are false. All value concepts purport to be objective, mind-independent evaluative facts; there are no such facts instantiated in our world; so all predication about them is false. The notion of moral requirements (as traditionally conceived) is that of an objective prescription. Moral reasons are inherent and universally normatively binding. They do not depend on the beliefs or desires of a person. Moral reasons being \'93objective\'94 Mackie takes to mean that they can be \'93objects of knowledge... true or false... recognized,\'94 and that they are \'93prior to and independent of our preferences and choices\'94 (Alexander Miller, \'93Realism\'94 SEP). Railton disagrees that binding \'91ought\'92-statements are also reasons for action. The reason he thinks no such values exist is that they are queer, strange, weird, unlike any other kind of plain natural facts. \cf4 \'93If there were objective values, then they would be entities or relations of a very strange sort, utterly different from anything else in the universe.\'94 Korsgaard (among others) agrees that they are strange but points out that the inference that they therefore don\'92t exist is invalid. They are very familiar, more familiar in one sense that plan natural facts. Regardless, Mackie is perplexed. He argues that courses of action are normatively inert. Furthermore, even if objective moral facts existed, they could not be known without a \'93special faculty of moral perception or intuition, utterly different from our ways of knowing everything else.\'94 Robert Audi\'92s book 
\i Moral Perception 
\i0 attempts to defend just that special faculty. Barring the existence of such a faculty, Mackie and other error-theorists proceed to analyze evaluative talk along very different lines: evaluative talk does something else linguistically besides describe moral truths \'97 it persuades, exhorts, expresses, approves or disapproves, describes fictional truths, etc. \cf0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf0 8.	A.J. Ayer\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Ayer is an expressivist of the emotivist kind. Along with Stevenson, Hare, Richards, et. al., he pioneered the contemporary forms of expressivism championed by Simon Blackburn and Alan Gibbard. He argues that value talk that purportedly aims to describe moral facts actually express the emotion of the speaker, namely, disapproval. \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri220\sl360\slmult1\sb220\sa220
\ls4\ilvl0\cf4 If I say to someone, \'91You acted wrongly in stealing that money\'92, I am not stating anything more than if I had simply said, \'91You stole that money\'92. In adding that this action is wrong, 
\i I am not making any further statement about it. I am simply evincing my moral disapproval about it.
\i0 It is as if I had said, \'91You stole that money\'92, in a peculiar tone of horror, or written with the addition of some special exclamation marks. The tone, or the exclamation marks, adds nothing to the literal meaning of the sentence. 
\i It merely serves to show that the expression of it is attended by certain feelings in the speaker
\i0  (Ayer 1946: 107, emphases added).\
The chief objection to many forms of expressivism is (the Frege-Geech problem) that evaluative sentences (when combined into complex sentences like conditional propositions) function semantically exactly like descriptive sentences. Blackburn and Gibbard have both attempted to solve this problem by giving accounts of both descriptive and evaluative sentences and accounts of the conditionals (and other complex sentences) in which they appear. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\ri220\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf0 9.	C. L. Stevenson (Charles Leslie Stevenson)\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 C.L. Stevenson (1908-1979) is an emotivist and proto-expressivist. Along with Ayer, Hare, Richards, et. al., he pioneered the contemporary forms of expressivism championed by Simon Blackburn and Alan Gibbard. He builds on Ayer but goes further to provide deflationary accounts of human psychology and language that might explain just 
\i why 
\i0 ethical talk occurs even though it does not live up to its objective purport.  \
\
At Cambridge, he knew Richards, Moore, and Wittgenstein, and each of these influenced his thought in some way. \
\
Stevenson analyzed ethical statements into two parts: a declaration of a speaker\'92s attitude (or value) and an imperative to mirror that attitude or value. Disagreements of moral questions arise from different attitudes. In such cases, agreement can be produced by showing one party that she is not being consistent with higher level moral attitudes, or by \'93persuasion\'94. Moral persuasion, in contrast to rational persuasion, corresponds roughly with the 
\i pathos 
\i0 division of Aristotle\'92s three part division of rhetoric into 
\i logos, pathos, ethos. 
\i0 It \'93depends on the sheer, direct emotional impact of words \'97 on emotive meaning, rhetorical cadence, apt metaphor, stentorian, stimulating, or pleading tones of voice, dramatic gestures, care in establishing 
\i rapport 
\i0 with the hearer... and so on...not... altering his beliefs, but by exhortation.\'94 (Stevenson, 
\i Ethics, 
\i0 139-40). Disagreements also result, of course, from differences in belief (judgments of fact) and persuasion by argument is here possible. Most actual disagreements are a mixture of differing fact-judgments and value-judgments (beliefs and attitudes), and are thus negotiated by a mixture of argument and raw, thought-less exhortation. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\li1440\ri220\sl360\slmult1\sb220\sa380
\ls4\ilvl0\cf4 A long tradition of ethical theorists strongly suggest, whether they always intend to or not, that the disagreement is one 
\i in belief
\i0 . Naturalistic theorists, for instance, identify an ethical judgment with some sort of scientific statement, and so make normative ethics a branch of science. Now a scientific argument typically exemplifies disagreement in belief, and if an ethical argument is simply a scientific one, then it too exemplifies disagreement in belief. The usual naturalistic theories of ethics that stress attitudes\'97such as those of Hume, Westermarck, Perry, Richards, and so many others\'97stress disagreement in belief no less than the rest. They imply, of course, that disagreement about what is good is simply one sort of disagreement 
\i in belief
\i0  about attitudes; but we have seen that that is simply one sort of disagreement in belief, and by no means the same as disagreement 
\i in
\i0  attitude. Analyses that stress disagreement in attitude are extremely rare (1948b, 3; see also 1944, 9\'9610).\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sa160
\ls4\ilvl0\cf4 These theses also continue to motivate current day expressivists, such Blackburn (1984, 1993) and Gibbard (1990, 2003).\
Ethics is not a science. Daniel Voibort summarizes the differences: \'93Ethical problems, according to Stevenson, are constituted at least in part by disagreement in attitude, while scientific problems are constituted only by disagreement in belief; hence, the function of ethical inquiry is at least in part to coordinate or settle attitudes, while the function of scientific inquiry is to coordinate or settle only beliefs. Ethical language, then, must have features, namely,
\i emotive meaning
\i0  ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/stevenson/#Emotive_and_Descriptive_Meaning"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 Section 3.3}}), that make it apt for coordinating attitudes, while scientific language need only have features, namely, 
\i descriptive meaning
\i0  ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/stevenson/#Emotive_and_Descriptive_Meaning"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 \ul \ulc5 Section 3.3}}) that make it apt for coordinating beliefs. Finally, the linguistic methods for resolving ethical disputes must be grounded at least in part by the relations among beliefs and attitudes, while those for resolving scientific disputes need be guided only by the relations among beliefs. For these reasons, ethics is not\'97and cannot be\'97a science:\'94 (\'93Stevenson\'94, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)\
These considerations about the nature of ethical attitudes motivate and define Stevenson\'92s contribution to the language and psychology of ethics. Namely, he develops a theory of language that allows language to express and alter attitudes. \
Brand Blanshard and others have objected to Stevenson\'92s emotivism, including the devastating Frege-Geach problem. Other objections include a 
\i reductio 
\i0 from the intuitively false consequent that if an event is bad only because people disapprove of it, then prolonged, meaningless suffering (of which no human being is aware) is not objectively bad.\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf0 10.	Kant\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Kant is the moral rationalist 
\i par excellence. 
\i0 Morality is practical reason. Kant despises virtue ethics, since the notion that virtue is supposed to help someone do his duty is opposed to the notion that the motivation for doing the duty is morally best when it is duty alone that motivates. Doing duty for the sake of happiness is a lesser good. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Introduction\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Pure reason pretends to metaphysical knowledge apart from the senses and apart from applied theoretical reason. The first critique blocks this pretension. Reason must always work within the bounds of intuition (senses) and the categories of judgment. Pure practical reason does presume knowledge of God, freedom, and immortality (as postulates) and must be cultivated. Applied practical reason must be curbed, since it introduces extraneous factors like pleasure and happiness. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Analytic\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Practical reason is the faculty for determining the will. We determine the will by applying general principles to our specific cases. A principle is either a maxim or a law \'97 a maxim is contingent and agent-specific; a law is necessary and agent-neutral. The moral law has a form, and the moral will follows it in form and content. The content is its form \'97 acting only on maxims that can be universally legislated is the content of the moral law. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Dialectic\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Motives aim at some good. Either motives aim at the highest good or at some particular and contingent good. The highest good is only duty. All other motives besides aiming at duty (aiming at pleasure, happiness, or virtue) are imperfect. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Method\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Virtue can be taught by showing examples of virtuous people whose duty lines up with self-love \'97 which will not do because it will not instill in students a love of duty for duty\'92s sake \'97 or by showing examples of virtuous people whose duty does not line up with self-love \'97 which will not do because it makes duty look onerous and unattractive. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0
\b \cf0 12.	Richard Boyd (Cornell Realist)\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0
\b \cf0 13.	David Brink (Cornell Realist)\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri220\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0\cf0 Brink combines "Externalist moral psychology, coherentist epistemology, non-reductive naturalism, and utilitarianism"\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0\cf0 \
\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0
\b \cf0 14.	Majors (realist / naturalist)\
15.	Sturgeon (realist / naturalist) \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0
\b \cf0 16.	Quine?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Quine is the first naturalist of a modern sort. His essay on naturalizing epistemology seeks to diminish the line between science and philosophy (where philosophy is absorbed into science rather than, as Aquinas might have it, the other way around.)\
\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls7\ilvl0
\b \cf0 8.	Ludwig Wittgenstein\
19.	Hilary Putnam\
20.	Daniel Dennett\
21.	Alan Gibbard\
22.	Simon Blackburn\
23.	Russ Shafer-Landau\
24.	Richard Joyce\
25.	Gilbert Harman\
26.	Christine Korsgaard\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls7\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Kantian constructivism \'97 tries to build a an ethical framework on our own practical reason. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls7\ilvl0
\b \cf0 27.	Roderick Firth\
28.	Ronald Milo\
29.	David Wiggins (Sensibility Theorist)\
30.	Jean Hampton\
31.	Michael Smith\
32.	Nick Zangwill\
33.	Margaret Olivia Little\
34.	Jonathan Dancy\
35.	Nicholas Sturgeon\
36.	Terence Cuneo\
37.	Norman Daniels\
38.	Robert Audi\
39.	Frank Jackson\
40.	Walter Sinnot-Armstrong\
41.	Terry Horgan\
42.	Nathan Jacobs\
43.	John Haldane\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls7\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Look him up on Philosopher\'92s Index, \'93virtue theory\'94 and \'93naturalism.\'94\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls7\ilvl0
\b \cf0 44.	Mark Timmons\
45.	Nietzsche\
46.	Plato\
\
}