{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red38\green38\blue38;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Can objective moral truth be known by any rational observer, regardless of the agent\'92s moral character, point of view, background beliefs? \
Robert Fitterer (2008) argues that some emotions, especially an agent\'92s love, is a precondition for seeing the objective ethical truth. Hursthouse (1999) is somewhat sanguine about denying that ethical truth can be achieved from an \'93external\'94 third-person perspective \'97 what particular ethical judgments shore up our continued reflection? Thomas Nagel (1989) thinks that objective and subjective standpoints are both valid even though they sometimes contradict. Alasdair MacIntyre is famous for asserting that all arguments, including his own, issue from within a \'93tradition\'94 and can only be judged from within that tradition but also denying that his position leads to relativism. Talbot Brewer\'92s (2009) passionate plea for a retrieval of ethics is also a retrieval of the self \'97 he shies away from Iris Murdoch\'92s more gutsy locution: recovering 
\i the soul. 
\i0 \
\
In this essay, venture into these treacherous waters. My inquiry shall follow the lead Anscombe, MacIntyre, Murdoch, and Brewer. My antagonist, not through ill-will but through a need for dialectical interlocutors, will be Hursthouse and Nagel. Nagel is too pessimistic that the \'93objective\'94 viewpoint is the scientific one \'97 assuming as he does (and many others) that empirical and quantitative science is all there is to science; instead, I propose, optimistically, that the subjective viewpoint is scientific, since theoretical and qualitative science are also science. And Hursthouse (and with her, John McDowell) are too optimistic about the Neurathian project of rebuilding our ethical outlook from within, without being impinged upon by objective (stance-independent) moral reality that is \'93out there.\'94 The correct balance \'97 no, not balance: the correct union of wild optomism and wild pessimism is in Robert Adams, for whom simply 
\i being for 
\i0 the good is enough to begin one\'92s journey to objective moral truth; but 
\i being for 
\i0 the good is only a beginning, with a thousand distractions and obstacles that get in the way to becoming truly virtuous. \
In the virtue ethical framework we have been developing, there is only one narrative: our life is unfolding dialectically along cognitive and practical lines, as we strive for wisdom and for virtue. Each step of \'93progress\'94 is not progress for the human race or the culture but for the person progressing. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fitterer first demonstrates how certain cognitive operations set out in Aristotelian virtue ethics can indeed arrive at objective moral truth precisely through the contribution emotions make in moral discernment. Then, drawing on Lonergan's notion of inductive insight, he argues that objectivity is the result of the properly functioning subjectivity of a moral agent. Finally, building on his study of Nussbaum's ethical writings, Fitterer concludes that compassionate love is an attitude that actually fosters the likelihood of discerning and choosing the genuine good, and encourages objectivity in moral decision-making.}