{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## Metaethics\
\
\
Reasons, desires, and obligations. These are hooked up. There are necessary connections. THey might all be hooked up, only some of them, one way or both way. \
\
Humeans think you have to have desire present to motivated by reason. \
\
*Internalists*\
The reason itself motivates you. \
\
*Externalists*\
Deny that reasons and desires are logically connected. \
Weak and strong versions. \
\
Mackie's first pass at objective values are not just hypothetically imperative. If you lack the desire, the movition, then you lack the obligation. That's the internalist danger. \
If you don't have the desire, then you don't have the reason. \
That's a bad thing about internalism -- if you lack the desire, you lack the obligation. THere are lots of internalist. \
\
Korsgaard is an internalist. Michael Smith is internalist. \
David Brink is a famous externalist. \
\
Mackie says reasons have to link up with motivations. Then he says "action-directing". Now I have a reason that actually has to direct my action. \
\
Two versions of internalism:\
*weaker* -- reasons motivate you. It's a necessary part of the concept of a reason. It's hooked up with motivation. May not issue in action.  (Korsgaard)\
*stronger* -- reasons action-guide you. It's a necessary part of the concept of reason. Has to issue in action. \
\
There's no dictionary definition. It all depends on the stipulative definitions. It's hard to solve the debate without showing how it all plays out.\
Internalism exempts people from morality. That's a bad result. People like Harmon believes that. There's nothing you can say to those people. I don't see anything wrong with them. There's nothing you can see. Reasons/obligations hook up with desires.\
\
"Action-directing absolutely" moral bindingness -- Superson wrote about that has to get it accepted. What makes a reason take with you? They talk about this compellingness. You can't help but accept them.\
\
People read Kant as an internalist. If you recognize you have a moral reason, then you will act on. There are many things written on internalism. Read for a starting paper: 1958 Frankena, Internalism and Externalism. \
\
Objective value might be the notion of "wrong itself"? (17)\
\
Bottom of (17)\'85 objective values have \'93fictitious external authority\'94\'85 authority is closer to bindingness. \
\
The only way we know them is through intuition. Kant is going to say 
\i no. 
\i0 How do I know these categorical imperatives? It\'92s contradictions in reasoning. If I can\'92t universalize a principle, and can only apply it to myself\'85 there\'92s a contradiction in my desires. \
\
Keith: epistemic reasons are binding. \
Anita: Don\'92t know what to say. I don\'92t do epistemology. The thing internalism and externalism in epistemology is different from ethics. What about legal reasons? Are they hooked up to motives? Do they issue in actions? There\'92s an analogy here. If you\'92re a strong internist, reasons necessarily direct us to act, 
\i cause 
\i0 us to act. If you don\'92t know what I\'92m talking about, you must not \'85 Compare moral reasons to practical reasons; legal reasons; reasons of aesthetics; etiquette;  you put the fork on one side, spoon on one side. Are they just as special and queer? \
Kosgaard is going to say \'97 that if you don\'92t have motivations then you\'92re irrational. Chapter 6 of the moral skeptic lays out the views, argues against internalism, and for weak externalism. For every person working on it there\'92s a different definition working on it. Complicated. Hard to argue for or against it. Seems intuitive, intuitions go one way or another. Have to ask what turns on this? What happens to the theory? }