{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ---\
author:     Keith Buhler\
title:      Notes on Joyce\
class:      Metaethics \
teacher: Anita Superson\
semester: Fall 2015\
---\
\
\
## The Myth of Morality\
\
The \uc0\u966  is tapu is not a meaningless statement, but it is universally false. \
\
Joyce argues that all of morality is like that. \
\
\'93Moral discourse commits us to reasons-talk.\'94 [@joyce2001myth 33] Institutional reasons are \'93legitimated by adherence to an institution.\'94[@joyce2001myth] The objective purport of morality is that they are not presented as institutional. They cannot be evaded. \
\
Practical rationality yields non-institutional reasons, for Joyce. It does not make sense to question why I should \uc0\u966  once I have granted that practical rationality says I should \u966 . \
\
Smith\'92s position is that \'93S is practically rational to the extent that she is guided by her subjective reasons, which in turn are understood as follows: S has a subjective reason to \uc0\u966  if and only if she is justified in believing that S+ would advise S to \u966 .\'94[@joyce2001myth 33] In other words, this formula does not allow S to be alienated from her practical reasons since they are by definitional fiat built into the meaning of practical rationality. \
\
The argument for moral error theory is that if someone is under moral obligation to do something, then that person ought to do that thing \'97 has reasons to do that thing \'97  \'93regardless of whether [doing so] satisfies any of his desires or interests.\'94 But \'93there is no sense to be made of such reasons\'94[@joyce2001myth 26] So someone is never under categorical moral obligation. \
\
Institutional reasons are \'93weak categorical\'94 reasons, in that they are really hypothetical. They are categorical *only* for members of that institution. They are not \'93real reasons\'94; they can be ignored. \
\
Practical rationality is not just an institution. To question an institution is intelligible. To question practical rationality is to ask for a *reason* and hence to (implicitly) assume that practical rationality needs not be questioned. \
\
So practical rationality  }