{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 # MacIntyre: The Telos of Practice (The *After Virtue* Project)\
\
## Introduction\
\
Modernity is a disaster. \
\
If this statement sounds false to you \'97 needlessly polemical, reactionary, exaggerated \'97 then MacIntyre\'92s life work will seem much ado about not much. If it sounds true to you, or near the truth, then MacIntyre\'92s life work will be of great interest. \
\
There are very few positions in between. \
\
In this chapter, we shall explore and analyze the ethical thought of Alasdair MacIntyre, especially his notion of practice and tradition. Practices (such as farming, teaching, and moral inquiry itself) are inherently teleological or end-directed activities that take place in the context of traditions. But this claim needs to be unpacked. \
\
MacIntyre\'92s ethical oeuvre spans many decades and has evolved through many ideologies. He has been a Marxist, Aristotelian, and (now) a Thomist. What has persisted is his criticism of post-Enlightenment modernity.[@mcmylor2005alasdair] For this reason, his work is an excellent starting point for these dissertation chapters. If a coherent and intelligible and socially useful and personally enriching concept of virtue can be constructed within the confines of modern moral philosophy, then MacIntyre\'92s dire diagnosis is mistaken. If, however, his diagnosis is correct, then much of modern moral virtue ethics has the same contagion. \
\
I shall  mostly treat his later work (from *After Virtue* to *Dependent Rational Animals*). These are most relevant to the kind of philosophical ethics I aim to study. At the same time, building his account of virtue requires foundations in moral psychology, epistemology, and philosophy of action. So I shall seek to elucidate the concept (or concepts) of virtue operative in MacIntyre\'92s theory, especially as virtue is a concept related to practice. \
\
The first section will summarize and interact with a limited set of important theses and show how he situates those claims in a historical context. For MacIntyre, the backdrop of successful moral inquiry must be the realization that modern moral philosophies have largely failed \'97 failed by their own standards of success. Later sections will critically respond to these writings, citing objections from various critics as well as pressing novel objections. Finally, I shall attempt to adjudicate the case and draw from it lessons we can endorse for a sound account of virtue. \
\
### MacIntyre\'92s View\
A few words in pre-payment about MacIntyre\'92s conclusions is in order. Although he is perhaps best known as a critic \'97 and widely dismissed as a radical or polemical critic \'97 he has also constructed a powerful positive account of virtues. He views his positive ethical positions as inheriting a tradition from the past, but vehemently denies that they are *
\i nostalgic.* 
\i0 We might even point out that his positive accounts are 
\i modern. 
\i0 They are "traditional" in the sense that tradition needs to be 
\i *both* 
\i0 received from the past *and* modified, improved, corrected, clarified, and augmented in the present before being passed on to the future. To be traditional, we can rightly say, is to be staunchly future-oriented -- since the work of life is to pass on to the next generation everything that is precious and valuable. \
\
Most broadly, MacIntyre thinks that virtues are good and useful for transforming communities and persons. At the practical level of daily life, a small community (such as a family or town or university) would do well to organize themselves around a common vision of what is good and a common conception of what qualities will help everyone to attain that good. Even though such a common vision of and pursuit of virtue is impossible to scale up indefinitely for 300+ millions people (in the U.S., for instance), it is possible and beneficial at smaller, local scales. And indeed, this is already happening. \
\
At the theoretical level of philosophical ethics, the concepts of virtue, practical wisdom, and happiness supply for moral theory what many modern moralities have not: a clear, coherent, useful, and justifiable theory that grounds a rational pursuit of the good life and resolvable moral disagreements. \
\
### What I Endorse\
The first thesis I will extract from MacIntyre and defend is that success in moral inquiry is possible because moral inquiry answers (or can answer) to the moral facts. But moral inquiry, as he will argue, must be conceived (like psychology) as a process rather than (like mathematics) a static and ready-made argument about universal relations between propositional truths. The object studied by ethics is not merely ethical principles but ethical persons; but the subject studying ethics is also the ethical person. So, unlike mathematics or physics, the subject is also the object. One feature of persons is that we are living a finite life, beginning in complete ignorance (as children) and progressing toward death. So moral inquiry, when successful, is that part of our life when we become sensitive to reasons, and begin (usually under guidance) to reflect on our own nature as practical reasoners. We first reflect on our projects, commitments, and priorities, and secondly begin to adjust our projects to pursue worthy ends by better means or to pursue ends we find more worthy. MacIntyre vociferously criticizes G. E. Moore\'92s Principia Ethica as beholden to false presuppositions and a naive, ahistorical attempt to do moral inquiry in a vacuum. \
\
The second thesis from MacIntyre I shall defend is that moral inquiry depends indispensably on natural teleology, specifically social teleology.  Social teleology is different from a global natural teleology. The differences are worth pointing out here. Some ends are real and natural; some end-directed motions, processes, and actions are real and natural. The notion of natural teleology has been disregarded, maligned, and misunderstood for many generations. So clarifying and defending my version of it will be an important piece of this chapter. As a brief pre-payment, I shall distinguish between various kinds of end-directed activity, from least controversial to most: (A) the end-directed (definitely intentional) actions and speech-acts of individual human subjects (e.g., going to the gym to get fit or uttering a sentence to communicate a proposition) and (B) the end-directed (definitely intentional) actions of groups, associations, societies; (C) the end-directed (intentional?) actions of all human beings in virtue of their humanity; (D) the end-directed (possibly intentional) processes of non-human animals (e.g., a deer fleeing a predatory to survive or a turtle swimming ashore to lay eggs); (E) the end-directed (though non-intentional) functions or processes of organic systems (the heart pumping blood to oxygenate the body, the optical photoreceptors converting light signals to electricity to produce sight); (F) the end-directed (though non-intentional) processes of individual non-organic substances (the piece of ice melting at 33 degrees Fahrenheit, the sunlight streaming through the atmosphere to make the plants grow); and (G) the end-directed (though non-intentional) global or cosmic process by which the universe seems to be moving (forming planets that can bring about life; abiogenerating life so as to bring about complex organisms). Having distinguished these, not all of them shall I defend.\
\
Rather, the centrality of at least some human social or natural teleology (A)-(C) to normative virtue ethics cannot be understated. And the centrality of natural teleology \'97 some subset of (C)-(G) \'97 to giving a plausible foundation of virtue will be seen in not only MacIntyre, but Foot, Hursthouse, and Brown. Briefly, in *After Virtue* MacIntyre presented a \'93socially teleological\'94 account of human virtue and practice rather than a \'93biologically teleological\'94 account \'97 one that \'93does not require the identifi\uc0\u142 cation of any teleology in nature."[@macintyre1984after 183] I shall try to defend both. But for now, we must turn to a survey of MacIntyre\'92s ethical theory. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ## The After Virtue Project\
\
### The Problem: Moral and Metaethical Disagreement\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
MacIntyre\'92s ethical oeuvre is best seen as a response to the problem of moral disagreement. His earlier writings focused on ethics. These writings took for granted some of the major modern assumptions about what moral inquiry is and what it can and should do. But he noticed that the state of the art was disarray. Professional ethicists disagreed with each other on any normative point you can think of (the permissibility of abortion, the standards of justice in war, the limits of medical regulation), on normative frameworks (deontology, utilitarianism, divine command theory, contractarianism), and on metaethical points (moral realism, moral epistemology, moral semantics), and more. He was frustrated (as we have all been) but the apparent impossibility of settling some moral disagreements. Both parties are passionate, informed, intelligent, open-minded and yet cannot come to anything like agreeing on the formal and material propositions under dispute. The apparent impossibility of settling moral disagreements over weighty primary normative issues, like abortion, sexual ethics, torture, war, the proper uses of technology has become the defining datum of modern reflection on morality and ethics. \
\
There is a striking similarity between moral/philosophical disagreements and kinds of disagreements in natural sciences. Those familiar with the philosophy of science conversation about methodology and disagreement may notice this. MacIntyre certainly did. Thomas Kuhn\'92s watershed Structure of Scientific Revolutions challenges the widespread naive belief that consensus in natural scientific inquires has been growing, steadily, in a straight line, since the 1600s. Rather, Kuhn persuasively argues, specific paradigms by which practitioners conduct research and through which they interpret evidence come and go. Some are fruitful, and are employed for generations. The paradigm is a research program around which many can unite as well as a stable scientific system of doctrine that can be added to or pruned. But lingering worries about the fine points of a scientific system and research program beget doubts about that system as a whole. At certain periods of epistemological crisis, researchers from rival programs (once dismissed) burst into the limelight by solving a problem the previous paradigm did not have the conceptual resources to solve. A paradigm shifts, a revolution has occurred. The new paradigm, once revolutionary, becomes the stable scientific system of a new era. From the perspective of one paradigm, it is difficult or impossible to judge the rational credentials of a rival paradigm.\
\
MacIntyre began to speculate about the possibility that Kuhn and Feyarabend\'92s analyses of scientific progress and scientific crisis could be fruitfully applied to ethics. His 1977 essay on epistemological crises was his own version of Kuhn's *Structure of Scientific Revolutions* -- we might call it MacIntyre's "Structure of Ethical Revolutions".[@macintyre1977epistemological] But unlike Kuhn, MacIntyre is not a postmodernist; while Feyerabend ended in a radical pluralism about rationality and methodology, a scientific relativism unpalatable to many scientific realists, MacIntyre\'92s theory attempts to avoid relativism. Some would say he was unsuccessful. But this is getting ahead of myself.  \
\
The fact is that people disagree about morals. Many metaethicists react such widespread, rampant, shrill, and apparently intractable moral disagreement by giving up on moral realism. The old project was a searching for the objective moral facts, the self-evident moral truths, or fundamental moral principles by which moral disagreements can be peaceably and reasonably settled without browbeating, censorship, name-calling, and ejection from the conversation. The new project is to accept the painful truth that there are no such facts, no such truths, no such principles: agreement is either impossible or is going to come about by different means: social contract, say, or disparate communities accepting disparate sets of \'93common values\'94, each set incommensurable with the others but also invincible to criticism.\
\
Other metaethicists react to widespread moral disagreement by redoubling their efforts to restore moral agreement by reference to moral facts, truths, or principles. Kantian (Korsgaard), utilitarian, contractarian, and now virtue ethical theorists compete in the marketplace of metaethics for the proper way to secure morality. \
\
It may not be obvious to those of us reading deeply in the discipline, but a moment\'92s reflection on modern metaethics reveals an iteration of the problem of moral disagreement. The disagreement among metaethicists (since Moore) about the proper explanation of and solution to disagreement among ethicists (since Hobbes, Hume, and Kant) has become the new problem of disagreement. \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ### The Solution: The *After Virtue* Project 
\b0 \
\
MacIntyre engaged in this metaethical dispute for some years. After a while, he gave up. Instead, he initiated a new project, which some call the \'93*After Virtue* Project\'94.[@murphy2003alasdair]  That project aims to justify joining and advancing the Aristotelian tradition of moral inquiry as a replacement of modern moral philosophical projects. The project explains the failure of metaethics to solve the failure of primary ethics. not only moral disagreement but the failure of metaethical explanations of moral disagreement. The key works in this project are *After Virtue* (1984), *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* (1988), and *Three Rival Versions of Moral Inquiry* (1990), and *Dependent Rational Animals* (1999). Each lays out more pieces of an unfolding ethical theory, (arguably) culminating in *Dependent Rational Animals*. But the MacIntyrean spirit of inquiry demands that we not treat his last statement of his theory as the final (ultimate) statement of the theory \'97 it is simply \'93the best so far.\'94 \
\
*After Virtue* most clearly states the problem of moral disagreement in modern moral philosophy, putting it in historical context. It argues that the problem at the root of the problem of moral disagreement is a series of fragmentations, facts from values, the self from the community, my good from the common good, and our concepts of justice and rationality from tradition. Each of these elements contribute to making modern, secular, rationalistic moral enquiry a hopeless endeavor. The upshot is that we have a dilemma: If modern rationalistic morality is hopeless (moral inquiry as encyclopedia), then we must either embrace Nietzsche\'92s self-justifying amoral Will-to-Power (moral inquiry as genealogy), or embrace the Aristotelian tradition of virtue (morality as tradition). \
\
If the deconstructive argument is correct, then modern moralities like deontology and utilitarianism (including all their trappings and purport of objectivity) are just as expressivistic as emotivism. A recurring theme in *After Virtue* and beyond is that there are two possible prognoses of this illness. The first is to abandon the purport of objectivity: follow expressivism and, ultimately, side with Nietzsche. We unmask all rational justifications of morality. We opt for cunning rather than wisdom; amplify our means to deteriorated ends. But we should not embrace Nietzsche. \
\
The second prognosis is to abandon the totalized fiction of community-free autonomous individual self that animates modern liberalism. \'93We lack,\'94 he says, \'93any coherent rationally defensible statement of the liberal individualist point of view\'94.[@macintyre1984after 241] If we see ourselves, again, as members of a community within a shared tradition, with shared origins, goals, and standards, then the objectivity and rational basis of morality becomes intelligible again. That is the Aristotelian tradition. We should get back to tradition to go forward. \
\
\
### Modern Moral Philosophy is a disaster\
\
Let\'92s look at the problem in a bit more detail. \
\
The first and most obvious symptom of the decay of moral discourse and social unity is interminable ethical disagreement.[@macintyre1984after 6] Moral discourse is largely devoted to moral disagreement, and moral disagreement is largely soaked in a despair of ever reaching agreement.The dual aspect of modern moral philosophy is that disputants on either side purport to be presenting the objective moral truth and they possess no unavailable rational standard for supporting their own view, let alone convincing others on purely rational or evidential grounds.  Individually, these aspects are not puzzling: One pattern is that when I meet people who do not share my tastes or preferences, I do not browbeat; I simply I live and let live. Another pattern is that when I meet people whom I view as ignorant or mistaken,  I try to persuade them by appealing to evidence to ascribe to the same rational, putatively objective standards I endorse But moral discourse doesn\'92t fit either of these non-puzzling patterns. how can my own, arbitrary, unaccountable opinions and preferences form the basis for browbeating those who do not share the same opinions and preferences as if they were not just different from me but ignorant and mistaken? Moral discourse with its expression of moral disagreement still retain the appearance of rationality at the same time that the seem to have given up on the rationality and publicly-accessible nature of morality. \
\
\
### Practice, Virtue, Telos, and Human Nature\
\
#### Preforatory Remarks\
Now let\'92s look at the putative solution in a bit more detail. MacIntyre does not simply recommend a \'93return to virtue.\'94 Any talk of \'93returning\'94 sounds like it is a nostalgic and anti-progressive longing for the past. The solution is not to reverse progress but to propose an alternative standard of progress. \
\
MacIntyre revisits the seminal text of the \'93Aristotelian tradition\'94: the *Nicomachean Ethics.* There we find the view that humans \'93like the members of all other species, have a specific nature; and that nature is such that they have certain aims and goals, such that they move by nature towards a specific telos. The good is defined in terms of their specific characteristics\'94.[@macintyre1984after 148] For Aristotle the virtues are \'93precisely those qualities the possession of which will enable an individual to achieve eudaemonia and the lack of which will frustrate his movement toward that telos.\'94[@macintyre1984after 148]\
\
We can see that Aristotle\'92s account includes these ingredients, all of which interlock with the others to form a coherent picture of a human being or community being excellent at life. (A) Human nature is part of nature; and for Aristotle \'93nature\'94 extends to include formal, final, material, and efficient causes. Hence our practical rationality is natural even though it is not material. Also, our end and (to some degree) the qualities that enable us to achieve that end are natural to us. (B) The virtues are those qualities that enable persons and communities to achieve their end, which is eudaemonia. (D) The telos of humanity is its (natural) final cause, its end. Eudaemonia is not pleasure, not wealth, not just wisdom, but virtuous activity.\
\
MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue is \'93neo-Aristotelian\'94 in that it borrows from but also contrast with Aristotle\'92s. (MacIntyre, for instance, denies that Aristotle\'92s virtues are so timeless, abstract, and generically human as Aristotle would make them appear; they are partly indexed to fourth century, upper-class, educated Athenian culture.) \
\
\
### Virtue \
So what is a virtue, for MacIntyre? His first definition of virtue is that virtues are \'93acquired human qualities that enable their possessor to achieve those goods which are internal to practices\'94[@macintyre1984after 191]. \
This definition demands elaboration on \'93practices\'94 and \'93internal goods\'94. Consider the practice of farming. A practice may be understood not as a mere action (like scratching an itch) but an intelligible set of actions organized around a goal and embedded in a social context. Farming is not just one action, but an intelligible set of actions (tilling, sowing, watering, protecting, harvesting, storing, etc.). Farming is not a solitary and abstract activity but is always undertaken by farmers who apprenticed (under parents or mentors). Farmers who master the practice become not only beneficiaries but benefactors, and may innovate new or better ways of farming that can be passed on to the next apprentice or child. \
Eventually, MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue transcends even this notion of practice, or at least transcends the narrowest definition of practice. His account of virtue includes three layers or dimensions: individual skill (like farming), social activity (like statesmanship), and human activity (like practical reasoning about how to live well). But it is essential to groups the first layer. \
So how do virtues enable the achievement of goods internal to practices? A virtue like courage enables a farmer who possesses it to achieve the goods internal to farming, namely, edible food. \'93Internal goods\'94 are those goods necessarily related to the practice, that are natural to the practice. A farmer might be famous in his town for hosting a yearly fair. He may receive praise, admiration, or extra financial income from this fair, but such goods are no part of 
\i *farming* 
\i0 per se. A farmer might be physically fit, strong, and able-bodied due to his manual labor. But he does not set about farming *in order to* become fit. \
The absence of virtue, by contrast, \'93effectively presents\'94 achieving the goods internal to practice. A cowardly farmer might overreact to a year of bad weather, change his methods in radical ways, upset delicate balances, and ultimately grow less edible food in the coming years. \
But this definition of virtue (in terms of practices) demands an explication of the concept of practice. I used farming as an example but thus far left the definition of practice implicit. \
\
#### Practices\
A practice, for MacIntyre, is a term of art denoting an activity carried out in a community (of fellow practictioners) according to a common history, common standards, and common goals.  Examples include chess, medicine, farming, politics. Lutz summarizes MacIntyre\'92s famous passage in this way:  a virtue is \'93(1) a complex social activity that (2) enables participants to gain goods internal to the practice. (3) Participants achieve excellence in practices by gaining the internal goods. When participants achieve excellence, (4) the social understandings of excellence in the practice, of the goods of the practice, and of the possibility of achieving excellence in the practice are systematically extended.\'94[@lutz2015]\
\
#### An example of a practice\
To get this definition in a bit clearer view, take MacIntyre\'92s favored example of a practice: political activity. Political activity can be done for reasons internal or external to the practice. That is, political activity can be done in order to bring about those objects necessarily political: the health, securing, and flourishing of the polis. Or it can be done in order to achieve \'93external\'94 (unessential) goods like fame, power, prestige, or book deals. Effectiveness in attaining these external goods does not constitute virtue. In fact, the desire to pursue external goods in the course of engaging in a practice are temptations. Virtues are needed to overcome those temptations and to succeed at political activity, judging \'93success\'94 only by the standards defined within practice itself. \
\
Now, practices are distinct from (but related to) institutions or traditions. For example, a university is an institution defined by a set of practices in which professors and students engage. Thomas is a tradition defined by a set of arguments playing out over time embedded in a social community. \
\
This distinction helps us to build up the second dimension of virtue.  Virtues indexed to practices are only one part of MacIntyre\'92s account; the second layer or dimension is social. This dimension stands to reason: agents are individuals but not merely individuals. \
\
>The virtues find their point and purpose not only in sustaining those relationships necessary if the variety of goods internal to practices are to be achieved and not only in sustaining the form of an individual life in which that individual may seek out his or her good as the good of his or her whole life, but also in sustaining those traditions which provide both practices and individual lives with their necessary historical context.[@macintyre1984after 223]\
\
\
#### Detachable self? \
The notion of a detachable self, divorced from past and from community is not the real self. Rather, each of us belongs by nature to a family (via genetics) and a culture. Furthermore, it is very often in social institutions (clubs, churches, schools, guilds, towns) that practices are learned, taught, preserved, extended. Injustice, cowardice, \'93corrupt traditions.\'94[@macintyre1984after 223] The persuasive examples are those of a present day black American whose identity is in part defined by the relationship of 18th century blacks to 18th century whites, or a present day Irishman whose identity is in part defined by the relationship of 18th century English to 18th century Irish. The if the notion of the detachable self were true, then my personal identity would have nothing to do with the trials and triumphs of those in the past; I could justly deny any part in pre-existing structures. \
\
#### Objection to virtue indexed to practice\
But thus far, by the first and second dimensions of his account of virtue, the account virtually begs to be read as a type of relativism: Is torture a practice? Is grand theft auto a practice that one can be excellent at? It certainly seems reasonable to think that some acquired qualities allow one to achieve the goods internal to car stealing. But MacIntyre denies being a relativist[@macintyre1984after xii-xiii in the 25th anniversary edition]. The full answer to the charge of relativism I detail and respond to below. For now, we only need to see how this objection forces MacIntyre to add the third layer or dimension to his account of virtue. He admits that there might be evil practices. We can add that institutions or traditions can be evil. If so, then some \'93virtues\'94 that enable the achievement of goods and the health and continuance of institutions would be bad qualities. So the account must do justice to the assumption that virtues are good for their possessor. \
\
#### Human Virtue \
The third level, then, is the broadest \'97 that of humanity. Individuals and societies or social groups do not share much (anything?) but what we are as biological and psychological creatures. MacIntyre admits that defining virtues in terms of practices necessitates questioning whether life as a whole can be virtuous \'97 the virtue of \'93integrity or constancy\'85 of singleness of purpose in a whole life.\'94[@macintyre1984after 203] Integrity is not our telos, but it is a necessary condition. So, from this broadest view, even practices and institutions can be judged by how well they accord with our overall purpose, our overall life, and our overall nature.\
\
### Human virtue as practical reasoning since human nature is practical reason\
As for human nature, human beings are practical reasoners; we are dependent, rational animals. That is what we are. And yes, we have natures. That word and that concept are not out-dated, outmoded, irrelevant, obsolete, unscientific, or any other such slur. Biologically, we are animals evolved from simpler animals.[@macintyre1999dependent x] And we are practical reasoners (more on that below). We are in a position to see how MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue works. We find ourselves in a tradition (or more than one). Within that, we find ourselves engaging in practices. We engage in some of these practices inside, and others outside, institutions. Virtues are those skills that enable us to perform the practice excellently; virtues are also those skills and habits by which we perform various social roles excellently; but finally virtues are those qualities by which we aim our practices toward an excellent human life, and by which we integrate our various social roles toward human ends. For instance, the most general virtuous qualities contribute to the flourishing of human being qua practical reasoner. The practice of practical reasoning is a universal human practice. The \'93human nature\'94 that is universally distributed across each member of our species is the capacity (sometimes unrealized) to become practical reasoners. This  makes sense of why educational institutions (as one example) are so important. Without them, virtues \'97 and the goods open to the virtuous \'97 are liable to remain unavailable to many. \
\
### Virtue and related concepts \'97 *Eudaimonia*\
\
So much for a summary of MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue. Some further comments are needed to fill out the relationship of virtue to eudaemonia. Talk of human nature and telos are inseparable. For MacIntyre, the loss of telos (human-nature-as-it-should-be) is one of the chief if not the chief error of Enlightenment moralities. Human-nature-as-it-is is a topic for both philosophers and social scientists: psychologists, sociologists, anthropologists, etc. But telos unifies human nature as it is with ethical principles and realistic ideals by which we can become something other than what we are at present. \'93To travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive\'94 and yet a having in mind a clear telos is a precondition for traveling hopefully. \
\
MacIntyre\'92s provisional conception of our human telos is this:  \'93The good life for man is the life spent in seeking for the good life for man, and the virtues necessary for the seeking are those which will enable us to understand what more and what else the good life for man is."[@macintyre1984after 210] Our telos is to be free to pursue our telos. MacIntyre is not a eudaemonist. At least, he is not obviously a straightforward eudaemonist; this conception of the human telos is more vague than Aristotle\'92s or Aquinas\'92s. Perhaps it is only provisional because it is so extremely indeterminate. How could it be made more determinate? The virtues needed to preserve the quest for the good, he suggests, may illumine \'93what else\'94 our telos consists in.  \
\
This essentially historicist view of human life is key to MacIntyre\'92s virtue theory. To see why, we need to think about narrative. In the minds of many contemporaries, human life is broken into isolate stages (childhood, adolescence, old age, etc.). The human self is isolated from its present community and from its position in relation to the past. By contrast, MacIntyre\'92s synoptic vision of human life is narrative.[See especially @macintyre1984after chapter 15] Human life is a unity, from birth to death (for individuals) and from emergence to dissolution (for groups and traditions). A human social group is a unity of members, more like an organism than  just an aggregate of atoms.  Narrative is not \'93disguise or decoration\'94 but an essential feature of the working of our minds and (arguably) an essential feature of the unfolding of reality through time. Narrative is not only a way of telling ourselves intelligible stories about what has happened, but is the very stuff of life. \
\
The end of our narrative (the terminus) is, of course, individual death. But narratives also have an end (goal). He says, \'93We live out our lives, both individually and in our relationships with each other, in the light of certain conception of a possible shared future, a future in which certain possibilities beckon us forward and others repel us, some seem already foreclosed and others perhaps inevitable."[@macintyre1984after 215] The unity of that narrative lies not only in our identity as a central character of our story, and our place in larger narrative contexts, but in the single telos governing all the moments of our \'93quest.\'94 Of course, quests do not always achieve their object. The narrative of human life always reaches its end (in death) but doesn\'92t always reach its end (in success, achievement of telos). But to see our whole life synoptically requires seeing it as a narrative. \
\
### The Relation Between Virtue and Telos\
With this in mind, the relation between virtue and telos comes more clearly to light. Since not only individual agents but whole communities and institutions (and the whole human race!) are aimed at a telos, the presence of virtues sustains practices and traditions. The absence of the relevant virtues \'93weakens and destroys\'94 practices and whole traditions.[@macintyre1984after 223] The absence of the higher level virtues, weakens and destroys the generically human goods: minimally, the freedom to pursue our telos. MacIntyre says: \'93The virtues therefore are to be understood as those dispositions which will not only sustain practices and enable us to achieve the goods internal to practices, but which will also sustain us in the relevant kind of quest for the good, by enabling us to overcome the charms, dangers, temptations and distractions which we encounter, and which will furnish us with increasing self-knowledge and increasing knowledge of the good."[@macintyre1984after 219] The \'93quest for the good\'94 is necessary but not sufficient. It is good, and it cannot be completed without relevant virtues. And yet there is more to the good. So that first provisional conception of telos as indeterminate may be right. For if a person or community could secure the freedom to pursue their telos, they could secures an ethical and political space within which to develop higher-order virtues. \
\
These higher-order virtues are the context for and hence limit and guide the other lower-order virtues. Still further, social and political virtues are also the context, limit, and guide to individual virtues. Social and political virtues are \'93required to sustain the kind of households and the kind of political communities in which men and women can seek for the good together and the virtues necessary for philosophical enquiry about the character of the good\'94[@macintyre1984after 219]\
\
MacIntyre is not a eudaemonist. At least, he is not obviously a straightforward eudaemonist. A cheeky paraphrase would be to: our telos is to be free to pursue our telos. But this is not quite correct. He concludes that the human telos (whatever it might robustly turn out to be) includes minimally the freedom to explore "what else" the telos might be. It is not vacuous to conclude that the virtues needed to achieve this (extremely indeterminate) goal themselves indirectly make room for and might directly illumine \'93what else\'94 our telos consists in. It may turn out (and his later writings are more explicit about it) that the determinate telos of a given tradition is a more determinate conception of eadaimonia. \
	\
### *Dependent Rational Animals*\
\
This discussion has, so far, kept itself mostly to *After Virtue*, only alluding to other works in the \'93*After Virtue* Project.\'94 I would like now to continue the story by including some themes and details from *Dependent Rational Animals* before turning to a critical response. \
\
The project of *Dependent Rational Animals* is to insist that (a) human beings are animals even if we are animals of a particular and unusual sort; and that (b) our dependence and vulnerability are as morally important as our independence, our autonomy and self-sufficiency. There are virtues of both dependence and autonomy. The book also contends that (c) certain social arrangements are conducive to the transmission and sustenance of both kinds of virtue.  \
\
Let\'92s consider a key quotation on each of these themes. Regarding (a) the notion that we are unusual animals, MacIntyre argues at length that the human differentia (be it language, reason, practical reason, self-consciousness, or what have you) does not eradicate or overshadow the commonalities between us and other animals. \'93I shall contend that although our differences from all other species are certainly of crucial importance, it is also important that both initially in our earliest childhood activities and to some extent thereafter we comport ourselves towards the world in much the same way as other intelligent animals. Indeed our ability to transcend those limitations depends in part upon certain of those animal characteristics among them the nature of our identity.\'94[@macintyre1999dependent 8] \
\
Regarding (b), he argues that vulnerability, dependence, affliction characteristic especially of early childhood and old age, but also of any sickness, injury, or misfortune are highly morally significant.  As he says he \'93virtues of independent rational agency need for their adequate exercise to be accompanied by what I shall call the virtues of acknowledge dependence and that a failure to understand this is apt to secure some features of rational agency. Moreover both sets of virtues are needed in order to actualize the distinctive potentialities they're specific to the human rational animal. Identifying how do while they are needed is a prerequisite for understanding their central place in the kind of human life through which human flourishing can be achieved.\'94 (Op. Cit.). \
\
Finally, regarding (c), MacIntyre argues that \'93neither the modern state nor the modern family can supply that kind of political and social association that is needed.\'94[@macintyre1999dependent 9]\
\
So we may fairly draw this connection between *Dependent Rational Animals* and *After Virtue*: since human beings are animals, social animals, and social practically-reasoning animals, our account of ends and virtues must be sensitive to all three of these points. On the one extreme, we cannot treat ourselves as slavish worms (without any practical reason whatsoever) nor on the other extreme can we treat ourselves as autonomous gods (without any dependency whatsoever). A human being is a practical reasoner in a human community. I would venture so far as to suggest this axiom as a definition of our species. (It is more accurate than flat-nailed featherless bipeds.) We are social animals by nature, and we are practical animals by nature, and we are reasoners by nature. \
\
### We are practical reasoners\
Observations we can readily make to support this axiom are so abundant it is hard to know where to start. A group of high school students exiting class for lunch stop in the hallway and argue about where to sit; a senate sub-committee convenes to deliberate on whether to pull federal funding from a particular health organization; a U.N. Assembly convenes to deliberate whether to place sanctions on a recalcitrant nation; a philosophy professor chats with the department chair about how to boost the number of majors; a father and mother sip wine, after the kids are in bed, while arguing over the grocery budget. Each of these situations, I hope, so familiar that my analysis will not (yet!) be controversial. The pattern each instantiates is a group of human beings engaging in practical reason \'97 a community thinking what to do. It is difficult to get out of bed in the morning without engaging in practical reasoning with others. Abduct the principle from the particulars: human beings, us, are practical reasoners in community. We are practical reasoners in communities. \
\
If this is true, the converse would be true: those who are not practical reasoners, or not in community, are not human. Regardless of whether this strikes a false note for the reader, it is at least intelligible. this corollary is the natural extension of the Greek view that exile was on par with, if not worse than, public execution. To remove you from your community is in an important sense to destroy you as a person. A hanging or poisoning only destroys you as a body. An exile is far worse than that. It rips you from your context, tears out from the social fabric the thread that you are. It turns you, while existing, into a non-being, a non-entity, an object. Regardless of whether we can sympathize with this way of thinking about exile, we can understand how one can be demoted from human status. \
\
We should not say that a non-practical-reasoner is not human, but that they fail to be exemplary. Brain-dead, or mentally handicapped, or injured etc., persons are not non-human but they are importantly defective qua humans, as I think common sense can recognize. \
\
### Why by moral? \
One answer to a perennial question of moral philosophy falls out of MacIntyre's picture of humanity as dependent animals/practical reasoners. That question is: "why be moral?" MacIntyre's point would be that we cannot pose such a skeptical challenge in the abstract. Who is the moral skeptic? Where does he come from? Where are his father and mother, his siblings, cousins, and his friends? If we answered these questions, we might learn something important about the abstract questions of moral motivation. \
\
The quotation marks are always ascribed to someone, however vaguely sketched the speaker is in the imagination. Perhaps we imagine a debonair 21st century immoralist who is getting away with whatever they can for the sake of thrills, or the angry and tumultuous bully like Thrasymachus (and Callicles), or brick-headed moral dunce, the psychopath whose conscience seemed broken at birth. It matters which we are imagining. \
\
Most of us have confronted by \'97  or have been \'97 real, embodied moral skeptics. Those of us who professionally teach non-philosopher undergraduates have confronted a variety of moral skepticisms "in the wild," in actual human beings. But skepticism in the wild is rarely (and in my experience, never) identical to the petri dish skepticism from our thought laboratories. Actual moral skeptics in my experience are staunchly dogmatic about morality in general, even fanatically authoritarian, but are radically skeptical about one or two pet issues: say, sexuality and politics. One skeptic I am thinking of was so radically in favor of equality (a substantive moral principle if ever there was one) that he thought it morally acceptable to steal from corporations. \
\
Moral psychologists study a phenomenon that, I think, we can all observe: growing up in a family and with friends causes a majority of moral development. We learn our first deontological rules from our parents. We first have the fear of God put in us, those who fear God, by our God-fearing parents. But we also learn our first utilitarian principles from our siblings, friends, classmates, playmates, distant cousins, and \'97 in a word, our peers. \
\
Davidson and Youniss, interpreting Piaget\'92s *The Moral Judgment of the Child,* argue that \'93the construction of identity and the construction of morality are aspects of the same construction.\'94 [%1991, 112] In other words, MacIntyre\'92s close tie between the self (as a narrative unity), practical reason, and morality is justifiable on empirical psychological grounds as well. \
\
Apply this close tie to the amoralist or the moral skeptic. Do they have a home country, a family? John \'93Jack\'94 Ames from Marilynn Robinson\'92s Pulitzer prize winning novel *Gilead* is an apparent amoralist.[@robinson2015gilead] Yet we know his family, the Boughton family, well. The unconditional love that Lila and the elder John Ames have for Jack eventually does seem to have an effect on him. But his behavior is both an expression of his self and forms his (new, different) self. \
\
The point of all this is that the question "why be moral?" has a clear answer for most people, but may have no answer in the abstract. The question \'93why be moral?\'94 is, for those with a clear sense of self and a strong community, almost unthinkable. Not that there is no answer, but that the answer is so obvious the question becomes bizarre and bewildering. So, briefly, for MacIntyre, we can say that the answer to \'93why be moral?\'94 in the proper social and ethical context is for us like the question \'93Why be yourself?\'94 An answer may be possible, but it would be halting, awkward, and difficult. More likely than answering such a question, the virtuous agent with a clear sense of self rooted in a narrative about the community and the agent\'92s place within it would return the question, \'93Why would anyone ever consider not being themselves? Why would anyone ever consider not being moral?\'94 \
\
While there is much more that could be said, let's call this adequate and consider some of the responses to MacIntyre's work. For MacIntyre, moral inquiry is a practice that takes place within a tradition, a community. It can and should be undertaken by regular folk, not just specialists in philosophy. And the goal of such inquiry is discovering what is really admirable and pursuing it, becoming more admirable moral agents through the acquisition of virtues. Virtues are acquired traits that enable the achievement of goods internal to the practices, those traits that sustain traditions, and those traits by which we overcome perennial temptations to lead lives that are divided, deviant, or contrary to our true nature. \
\
## Objections\
\
MacIntyre's philosophy is highly interesting, but forms such an interconnected whole that it is difficult to pick out and criticize just one part. For those of us who are sympathetic to his methods and conclusions, the goal is to extend the tradition by pruning and cultivating; for those who are not sympathetic, the goal should be to exercise philosophical imagination and consider a vision in which virtues as qualities that enable us to pursue the goods internal to practices, and see practices themselves as embedded in traditions which are \'93historically extended arguments."\
\
MacIntyre's work has been influential. Yet he has opponents on all sides. Most broadly, on the one hand, defenders of what MacIntyre lumps together as "modernity" or "modern liberalism" object to the historical narrative by which they (all!) get somehow lumped together by a single (quite despairing) diagnosis of unintelligibility. On the other hand, even critics of modernity who accept his diagnosis might dispute the prognosis. For example, even Thomists with whom he ostensibly shares a philosophical school dispute his Thomism. \
\
By far the largest group of professional philosophers belong to one or the other of the two remaining rival versions of moral inquiry. And professional philosophers, of which he is a quite successful, may be tempted to reject him because he is so critical of professional philosophy. (I treat 'success' here as a function of how often your work is cited either by defenders or detractors.) "A philosopher, he insists, should try to express the concepts embedded in the practices of our lives in order to help us live morally worthy lives. The professionalization of philosophy into a technical field\'97what might be called the academic captivity of philosophy\'97reflects (and serves to legitimate) the compartmentalization of the advanced capitalistic social orders that produce our culture of experts, those strange creatures of authority in modernity."[@hauerwas2007]\
\
The three rival versions of moral inquiry, you will recall, are tradition, encyclopedia, and genealogy. Tradition MacIntyre endorses. But "Encyclopedists" dispute his historicism and the implied relativism of ethical theory. These objections see the emphasis on traditions and practices, and tradition-specific standards of reason and justice, as incommensurable with the ambitions of universal, timeless, aperspectival moral truths. A Kantian or utilitarian can defend his favored rational, secular morality. \
\
And (somewhat ironically) relativists like Gilbert Harman reject his moral realism. These think that his emphasis on traditions is well-taken, and that he should not therefore try to extricate any universal moral truths. \
\
"Geneologists" and postmodern philosophers agree with his critique of liberalism but choose, in a word, Nietzsche over Aristotle. And perhaps Nietzscheanism is true. Philippa Foot argued that analytic philosophers do not take Nietzsche's immoralist challenge seriously enough.[@foot2001natural chapter 7] Perhaps MacIntyre is correct to set up modern moral philosophies as (failed) masks for Nietzsche, the only alternative to which is Aristotle. Even if the dilemma is correct, perhaps he chooses the wrong side. All moral discourse that appeals to rationality, divine law, human nature, tradition or any other such nonsense beside the individual will is a mask. The only real and authentic spring of morality is, of course, the Will to Power. \
\
It will be impossible, of course, to do mention let alone do justice to all the responses offered by MacIntyre's sizable crowd of audience members, interlocuters, and critics.  Instead, we shall pick out just a few that seem to me the most helpful. \
\
First, an objection that amounts to an interpretive challenge: Call this the Primary Virtue Objection. It simply asks: Which of MacIntyre\'92s concepts of \'92virtue\'92 is the primary sense of virtue? Aristotle\'92s conception of virtue is that virtues are acquired human qualities (habits) that contribute to (and are at least partially constitutive of) eudaemonia. Those qualities that contribute to the good internal to a practice are certainly skills, \'93know-how\'94, technical knowledge or what have you. But not all practices contribute to human flourishing.  Grand theft, torture, etc., are contrary to other virtues (respect for private property, kindness). Other practices can be plausibly seen as value-neutral (table tennis?). Therefore, not all MacIntyrean virtues qualify as Aristotelian virtues, in the sense that many assume virtues are beneficial to their posessor. \
\
A second objection we can just call the Relativism Objection. Virtues are relative to practices, to communities, and to human life as a whole. There is disagreement across cultures (even when there is agreement within a culture) about the end of human life, about the proper ends of communities and individuals. So all MacIntyre has done is given a kind of anthropological account of what people from that group consider to be virtues, not what virtues actually are. \
\
A third related objection is the Incoherence of Tradition Objection.  While not strictly about his ethical theory, since virtues are defined in part by traditions, it is important to consider the concept of tradition. This objections states that his tradition-constituted definition of rationality is self-contradictory. MacIntyre says on the one hand that, according to Tradition A, X is rational. According to Tradition B, X is not rational. They disagree and seem to genuinely disagree. A member of Tradition A can reasonably affirm that X cannot be both rational and irrational. Now, MacIntyre says that a member of Tradition B can discover some internal contradiction in Tradition B that makes her reconsider her tradition as aw hole. Perhaps she discovers that, according to Tradition B, Z is both rational and irrational. She is disconcerted by the contradiction. She decides to imaginatively entertain the possibility that Tradition A is more adequate and comes to see, over time, that Tradition A\'92s critique of Tradition B is compelling. The odd conclusion is this: affirming a contradiction is irrational for anyone in any Tradition. Now, I endorse this conclusion; if someone affirms a contradiction, and they persist in it in spite of repeated attempts to explain to them the contradiction, I would find them not just mistaken but fundamentally mentally impaired \'97  irrational. But the point is not whether the law of non-contradiction is true and a reliable criterion of rationality. The point is that MacIntyre cannot say so without contradicting himself. \
\
Suppose first that Tradition A teaches that logical contradictions are irrational, while Tradition B teaches that logical contradictions can be rational. Then the member of Tradition B that affirms a contradiction (Z is both rational and irrational) will not, by her own standards, see a problem with her affirmation. A member of Tradition A will see the problem (by his own standards), but this is nothing surprising or new. The member of Tradition B has in principle no path out of her tradition, no motivation to see her tradition as mistaken, and hence no motivation to consider Tradition A. \
\
Suppose now that Tradition A teaches that logical contradictions are irrational and Tradition B teaches the same. Now, according to MacIntyre, they agree (at least on this point) about a standard of rationality. They disagree about whether Z is rational or not, but they agree that Z cannot be both irrational and rational at the same time in the same respect. Are Tradition A and B now part of the same tradition, since they agree about the law of non-contradiction? Or are they different traditions, since they disagree about the rationality of Z? \
\
## Critical Response\
\
While I agree with much of MacIntyre\'92s picture of the development of western civilization, there is far more in his proposals than I can comment on, let alone defend. \
\
Incoherence of Tradition. I\'92ll respond to the last objection first, since it seems to me the most tangential to MacIntyre\'92s ethical theory. I think it true that tradition influences our standards of rationality, justice, and virtue, but demonstrably false that it constitutes such standards. The law of non-contradiction is the counterexample. Every tradition affirms the law of non-contradiction; every tradition denies rational agents the right to believe (P & ~P). Any tradition that denies the law of non-contradiction, it seems to me, is an irrational tradition. And I don\'92t just intend to say it is irrational relative to my own standards of rationality, but that it is irrational full stop and possible to \'93step outside\'94 my tradition far enough to see that. If there even does exist any person (such as Nagarjuna) or community or tradition that affirms (P & ~P), we ought not interpret them as having a different standard of rationality but rather we ought to interpret them as believing that rationality is an obstacle to nirvana. Affirming contradictions is still irrational, but it is the kind of irrationality needed to do violence to the limits of rationality and transcend them. \
\
So I think MacIntyre\'92s unqualified claims about tradition constituting rationality should be limited to claims about other standards for acceptable kinds of evidence, etc. \
\
**Relativism Objection.**  MacIntyre has himself refuted the charge of relativism multiple times. J. L. A. Smart\'92s refutation I find the most instructive. \
\
**Primary Virtue Objection.** Which of MacIntyre\'92s concepts of virtue is the primary sense? I would disagree that virtues enable an agent to achieve the goods internal to any individual practice (like chess-playing). Those qualities are akin to virtues but not virtues except in a derivative, analogous sense. If I were to emphasize their difference from virtues in the primary sense, I would simply call them individual skills; if I were to emphasize their commonalities, I would call them virtue-skills.  Skills are \'91acquired human characteristics\'92 that share certain features with virtues: they are habitual, learned, and can contribute to an agent\'92s character. But they are only derivative in that they contribute to goods of this or that particular practice rather than of the general project of living flourishing human lives. MacIntyre seems to concede this distinction when he concedes that some practices might be oriented toward wicked ends. So virtue-skills are not, by definition, traits that benefit their possessor. \
\
The second layer of virtue is a skill that emerges within social practices. Skills related to political activity is an example. These skills are not even conceivably individualistic; they are always performed by people with other people within a community. And yet this layer or dimension is not, I would argue, the primary sense of \'91virtue.\'92 The reason is that communities can be corrupt. An entire social group can engage in a social practice that is itself vicious, that is antithetical to human flourishing. The social practice of trading slaves might be an example. A community composed of members who each have the skill of performing that activity in such a way as to achieve the goods internal to slave-trading would seem to count as \'93virtuous\'94 by MacIntyre\'92s loose standard, but this feels forced. The intension of the term \'91virtue\'92 is partly, by definition, good activities (meaning good for creatures like us). \
\
So it seems to me important that only MacIntyre\'92s third layer or dimension of virtue is properly so called. Virtues that contribute to the goods internal to the \'93practice\'94 of human life as a whole. We must conceive of human life as a narrative unity, with beginning (birth and childhood) middle (maturity and adulthood) and end (decrepitude and death). Those qualities such as courage, moderation, kindness, generosity, affability and so on that contribute to success qua human flourishing are properly virtues. They help us to flourish, they are necessary conditions of a flourishing human person and community. Of course, this is the sense of the term \'91virtue\'92 that Aristotle gave millennia ago. \
\
So if only this third dimension of the MacIntyre\'92s concept of virtue deserves the unqualified epithet \'91virtue,\'92 and if that concept was already explicated in detail by Aristotle, then is MacIntyre\'92s painstaking construction of a three-layered account pointless? There is a point of importance to be extracted, I think. That important point can only be seen if one builds up to the concept of virtue from (potentially value-neutral) individual practices or skills to (potentially value-neutral) social practices. \
\
### Endorsements\
\
One thesis I would like to extract, develop, and defend is this: human practices are necessarily end-directed (teleological). \'93Social teleology\'94 has at least two and possibly three aspects: individual, collective, and human. The first aspect of social teleology is the end-directed behavior of each agent; the second is the end-directed behavior of social groups, like families, nations, clubs, congregations, and so on. The third, and most objectionable, aspect, is the end-directed activity of our species as a whole. What, if anything, does every human being intentionally pursue? \
\
The answer to this question is bound to be controversial. But before we try to answer it we can pause and point out that MacIntyre has made the question intelligible and urgent. \
\
Human life is, in some sense, a practice. It can be brought under the concept of a grand unified whole practice or pluralist set of practices. Human life is, at least viewed under this concept, therefore teleological and indispensably so. Iris Murdoch argued as much in her famous essay (1950) \'93The Sovereignty of Good over other Concepts.\'94  Even if human life has \'93no external point or \uc0\u964 \u949 \u955 \u959 \u962 \'94, it has one from within. We pursue projects. It is impossible, in other words, to bring our own human life under the concept of an event. \
\
This insight has important implications for ethics, as well as other fields: action theory, sociology, anthropology, philosophy of mind, and so on. I shall not explore those implications here. Michael Thompson has explored the implications for \'93practical philosophy\'94 (some metaphysics, philosophy of mind, philosophy of action, and more) in his (2008) Life and Action: Elemental Structures of Practice and Practical Thought. This assumption-trouncing work is radical not in its conclusions but in its simplicity and depth of insight. Thompson argues that the concepts of practice, action, and life are successively larger conceptual spheres, where the latter includes the former, but where the former is constitutive of the latter. And upon reflection, each concept exhibits an undeniable Aristotelian structure. Modern theoretical and practical philosophies that obscure these concepts or miss the mark obstruct progress in practical philosophy. \
\
While I cannot do justice to Thompson\'92s admirable work here, I mention it to point out that MacIntyre\'92s thesis about \'93social teleology\'94 \'97 the irreducibly teleological or end-directed nature of individual and group human activities \'97 seems correct. And if it is correct, it demands the re-evaluation of some cherished assumptions. \
	\
	\
## Conclusion\
\
MacIntyre\'92s work is difficult to pick apart and summarize or critique in fragments. The compressions of his orchestral arguments in this chapter are inevitably going to leave some readers dissatisfied, perhaps even dismayed, by what I have made it appear that he is saying. Readers are of course invited to revisit the source. But if my summaries have captured with any accuracy the outline\'92s of MacIntyre\'92s contribution to virtue ethics, then we can say a few things with some confidence: virtue is, for MacIntyre, primarily an acquired human trait that enables its bearer to achieve characteristically human goods that are necessarily related to human life; secondarily, we may call virtues or virtue-like those qualities that enable their bearers to achieve goods internal to social and individual practices. Practices are in part constituted by their practicitioners \'97 biologists can change what biology is from within; farmers can advance what it means to farm. But practices are also constitutive of traditions. Traditions are, again, are socially embedded arguments playing out over time and across generations. \
\
Differing traditions explain differing accounts of virtue. Though MacIntyre\'92s career began in straightforward engagement in dialectical disputes about philosophical ethics, it turned a corner when he thought to treat ethical disagreement in a manner analogous to the way Kuhn treated scientific disagreement. The result of turning this corner \'97 MacIntyre\'92s own paradigm shift \'97 was an account wherein he argues (similarly to some postmodern philosophers) that malleable traditions define standards of rationality, justice, and virtue. But he also argues, to the chagrin of postmodernists, that traditions are answerable to the world, and can be falsified.  He argues that a thoroughgoing cultural relativism (or \'93tradition-relativism\'94?) is inadequate. Such a theory holds the promise to explain why various cultures disagree about what qualities are virtues (humility or pride? acquisitiveness or contentment?) and why the same culture disagrees over time with itself about what exactly defines a particular virtue (is chastity moderation of sexual pleasure or just abstinence?) \
\
Though MacIntyre\'92s theories are built on many implicit assumptions, each of which a critic might make explicit and dispute, the conclusion we have found some reason to believe is that virtues are qualities inherently related to the teleology of practice. Human life, action, and practice are all teleological or end-directed. A philosophical ethics built on mere legalism says that some actions are inherently wrong in violating moral laws, or inherently irrational in violating laws of practical reason. Such legalism runs the risk of ignoring or denying the teleological dimension of practice. A philosophical ethics built on mere consequences says that some actions tend to be wrong in that they tend to produce undesirable or unhappy consequences. \
\
}