{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## Some themes ##\
\
Contemporary virtue ethics is reviving. This dynamic process has produced a diversity of voices. There are lively controversies on the main stage as well as some fascinating sideshows. Though consensus around the answers is pending, a set of thematic questions have emerged: \
\
1. First and foremost, what exactly *is* virtue (and its opposite, vice)? There are many accounts of virtue. Are they compatible or are there some that are more plausible? Are there any good answers to skeptical worries to the effect that there are no habitual characteristics or acquired traits such as virtues and vices are supposed to be.[@harman2009skepticism] Do virtues and vices qua stable character traits even exist? Or if they exist, do they matter enough to make theorizing about virtue even interesting?[@kamtekar2004situationism]\
\
\
Another traditional notion defines virtues as those traits by which one becomes *fully human* or actualizes human nature. (Human nature is something like a set of properties or capacities common to all humans -- at least all non-defective humans. Human nature has been thought to include such essential properties as practical rationality, or rationality in general, language, social consciousness, self-consciousness, or genetic and other environmental/cultural properties.) Talk of a fixed "human nature" implies that an agent's humanity is in one sense a *given* to be discovered, while in another sense it is a goal to be achieved. One of the most persistent and widespread objections to this conception of virtue is that it seems to depend on a discredited Aristotelian metaphysical picture of human nature. Furthermore, even if we could expound and defend a realistic concept of human nature, would basing ethical conclusions on metaphysical or psychological premises commit Moore\'92s so-called "naturalistic fallacy"? How do we proceed from a premise about *the way human nature is* to any specific normative conclusions such as *humans ought to keep their promises*? Human nature is rational. Perhaps this explains why there is a growing body of literature on the theme of intellectual (rather than merely moral) virtues.[Cf. @zagzebski1996virtues;  @bloomfield2000virtue] Some think practical wisdom (or phronesis) is one virtue among many, while others think it the master virtue that unifies both practical and intellectual. Are all virtues practical or are some intellectual? \
\
\
\
2. Since Aristotle's writings, virtues have often been thought to play a special role in giving the virtuous agent *happiness* (eudaimonia, flourishing, thriving, welfare, etc.).[Cf. @annas2011intelligent] But Bentham and Nietzsche, among others, mock this alleged role. Is there any inherent relation between virtue and happiness? If so, are virtues necessary for happiness (as Foot thinks) or necessary *and sufficient* for happiness (as McDowell thinks)? Several conceptions of virtue (following Aristotle) have set eudamonia as the \'93function\'94 of humanity, its purpose or telos. Does it make sense to speak of a *human function*? If so, just what is it? And how does it relate to our unique attributes, like higher rationality, self-awareness, and language?  @brown2008 accepts natural final causality but rejects eudaimonia, preferring to speak in Darwinian terms about our purpose as reproduction, while @hursthouse1999 speaks about four "characteristically human ends" including but not limited to reproduction. Relatedly, if virtue is sufficient for happiness, does that mean that the life lived in pursuit of virtues and avoidance of vices is a life of shameless egoism?[Cf. @annas2009; @huang2010self] \
\
9. One worry about virtue ethics that does not carry the same bite for the deontologist is so called problem of moral luck. The problem, roughly, is that if virtues like generosity depend on having wealth, the unfortunate and unlucky are excluded from moral virtue by non-moral facts. Is this a genuine problem? If so, what solutions are available? \
\
10. Finally, there are more abstract or foundational questions such as how (if at all) might virtue virtue theorists have unique resources for defending a claim to objective moral knowledge? And what does \'91objective\'92 mean?[@sellars1927naturalism. I have been helped in the clarification of this term by an old but extremely perspicuous article by Roy Sellars, the father of Wilfred Sellars.]\
\
The four key virtue ethicists listed above address some or all of these questions. For each writer, I shall remaining sensitive to their particular project, while keeping an eye on some or all of these thematic questions.  My governing questions are: first, how does each philosopher conceive of virtue \'97 and what are the implications of that conception? Second, how does he or she defend that conception against a battery of objections? Thirdly, what valuable insights can we cull from their accounts? My goal is that this work lays the foundation for future work on the ethics and foundations of virtue. }