The case for natural normativity is an old one. The case against natural normativity is perhaps equally as old, 
I shall draw extensively from James Barham's recent dissertation on the same subject of natural normativity, though he speaks primarily of teleology. He defines his view in this way: "To be a realist about teleology in biology is to hold that there is some objectively real principle in living matter itself that corresponds to our concept of teleology."[@barham2011 33] My addition to Barham's impressive scholarship is to tie realism about teleology (functions) and life forms more closely together under the joint heading of realism about natural norms.

The major rivals to realism about natural normativity (besides non-naturalism, which I do not discuss) are normative anti-realism and normative reductionism. Both, I would argue, depend rely on a picture of nature as a manifold of purely descriptive and non-normative facts, entities, properties, and laws: what McDowell calls "bald nature". A better term would be "Laplacian nature," since the notion that the cosmos is coldly factual, bald of values, and disenchanted from any supernatural esoterica, aligns more closely with Pierre-Simon Laplace's mathematical picture of nature. To say Laplace pictured nature as a "machine" would be too imprecise; machines are fuzzy compared to mathematical formulae. Laplace pictured nature as a set of cold, abstract, and necessary relations. This picture is, I would dare to say, unscientific. At the very least, it is not *the only* scientific picture. Regardless, Laplacian nature emphatically does not include natural norms. Normativity is either projected onto nature by humans -- be they scientists or philosophers or regular folk -- or else what humans call normativity can be reduced to non-normative facts. Hence, realism about normativity is incompatible with the Laplacian picture. 

Furthermore, realism about natural normativity is one common basis upon which ethical naturalists build a theory of *human* ethics. Hence, a major objection to ethical naturalism (which relies on the picture of bald or Laplacian nature) is sometimes called the "is-ought gap." The is-ought gap is taken to be *the* problem for ethical naturalists who are both naturalists and realists about moral facts. If moral facts are real, what are they? And *where* are they? How can they motivate? If moral facts are non-natural, then are they real or not? 

I shall argue that there are at least two forms of the is-ought gap. One of them is insoluble but the other can be solved by appeal to natural norms. Ethical naturalists posit a particular relationship between natural facts and moral facts, or facts and values, or nature and normativity. Each does so in their own way. The attempt to show how facts entail norms is, I think, misguided. Instead, I shall attempt to show that some facts just are norms. These are natural norms. In other words, some scientifically respectable natural facts are also real, mundane, normative facts on a level with properties and processes like 'being a penguin' or 'pumping blood.' 

The respectable scientific notions I propose are natural kinds (life forms) and natural functions or ends. Though they can be given anti-realist or reductionist interpretations, anti-realism is by no means the default view of working scientists nor the default view of philosophers with a healthy respect for modern science. Polemicists who pretend that anti-realism or reductionism about natural kinds and natural functions are "the" scientific view are propagating their philosophical doctrine; the rhetoric is certainly powerful but the argument is weak. 

The upshot of the normativity of nature for ethics is that if we can defend natural norms, it is at least possible that we can identify human natural norms. That is, we can identify a kind of normativity that is binding on human beings as practical rational animals but that is not merely invented by human individuals or human cultures. It would be natural without being crassly biological; it would be both biological and practical or rational in a way that I will explain later. 


---
"Wise people report being happier" must somehow lead to "You ought to pursue wisdom." Assuming that the natural facts are descriptive facts, the ethical naturalist would have to show how, in general, descriptive propositions can serve as premises with true normative conclusions. 

Normative propositions such as '*you ought to be wise*' or *'It is good to be tolerant of people with different views'* or *'It is bad to bring a gun to school and start shooting people'* seem pretty uncontroversial. But why are they true? And how do we know them? The realist non-naturalist has a good explanation: such statements pick out fundamental, non-natural, moral facts. The naturalist anti-realist also has a good explanation: such statements express the speaker's individual and cultural norms. The ethical naturalist's explanation is a bit trickier. He or she must show how such statements relate to the *natural* facts. One way would be to argue that "you ought to be wise" is itself a natural fact, but that way strikes one as rather odd; another way would be to argue that "you ought to be wise" is a normative truth derivable from some other fact that is natural. 