## Three Paths Forward

I have made a case for normative realism that identifies some normative properties (such as formal and teleological properties of organisms) as respectable natural properties. I call this normativity 'organic normativity' and the resulting naturalism 'organic naturalism'. This label distinguishes my view from an "enchanted" view of nature wherein even rocks, chemicals, and stars instantiate normative properties. 

While my case is disputable, the natural phenomena in question are indisputable: first, that organisms *very strongly appear* to exist in natural kinds (birds are not bacteria and crystals are not organisms at all); secondly that organisms exhibit "teleonomic" or *apparently teleological* phenomena such as striving to reproduce. 

My point has been that realism about kinds and teleological phenomena is the simplest explanation of these phenomena. There are three paths forward. The first, and most plausible, path is that we can simply accept normative realism. 

### Reject

The second, and least plausible, path is that we could embrace full-scale normative anti-realism and deny the objective reality of any such norms in nature (and indeed, even in human beings). This path requires us to explain away not only natural kind, teleonomic phenomena in nature, but the apparently teleological actions of human beings. 

For example, we would have to deny that animals, plants, insects, all living things (and even ecosystems) exhibit end-directed or teleonomic behavior: eyes see, hemlock trees offer shade to fish, stomachs digest, deer leap to avoid predators. This denial is almost incredible. If all generics are false (or only conventionally true) then it is in some important sense false that 'wolves hunt in packs' and false even that 'penguins are birds'. It is false not only that "eyes see" but even that "humans are primates". Such denials are, I think, absurdities.[^25] Even when Kant denies natural teleology -- the biological theory that the form of an organism causes the parts to grow and relate to each other in a particular way -- he admits we *cannot help thinking so*.^[@huneman2006naturalising]  To categorically reject *all truths* about natural kinds and natural functions, I contend, is untenable. And some generics are, it seems, necessarily normative propositions. 

If we accept the truth of at least some generics, then Perlman's surprise is well founded: "It is surprising that analytic philosophers, with their strong focus on science, would reject a notion that is so central to some areas of science, most notably, biology and engineering sciences... Biology cannot, or at least in practice does not, eliminate functions and purposes."^[@perlman2004teleology 6.] One might suppose that Perlman's qualification "or at least in practice does not" leaves open space for the normative anti-realist. I welcome the critic who would try to show that biology *can* eliminate functions; what I have tried to suggest, and what Barham argues in great detail, is that the attempt has been made and has failed. A few failed attempts at reduction does not prove that reduction is impossible. But it does make the more plausible view, teleological realism, a better candidate for the default view. 

[^25]: That is not to say that the denial is not worth considering. It might well be true. My point in calling the denial 'absurd' is to say that if it is true, an absurdity is true. If it is true, then the truth is absurd. And reality itself might well be absurd. I don't believe it is, but there have been many philosophers who have thought so. 

Despite my inability to see the plausibility of global normative anti-realism, I must acknowledge that it has impressive defenders who deserve a fuller response than I can give here. Since anti-realism is not likely to appeal to the scientific naturalists in my intended audience, I must let these comments suffice. 

### Reduce

The third path, and the most plausible rival to realism, is to develop a reductionistic account of apparently natural norms. This path accepts the appearance of such things as natural kinds, natural teleology, natural functions, etc., but *reduces* these phenomena to less spooky (read: more mechanistic) phenomena consistent with a conception of bald nature. For this section, I ignore natural kinds and focus simply on teleological normativity. So we can call reductionism of such natural norms  "teleological reductionism" or "teleoreduction", following James Barham.^[@barham2011 chapter 3. My discussion will closely follow this chapter; however, Barham's discussion is far too rich to be summarized.] Arguing for or against teleoreductionism has become a cottage industry.^[Cf. @perlman2004teleology, section III; and @barham2011, chapter 3.]  

I do not think that teleological reductionism is as plausibility as teleological realism; I do not think it is very plausible in its own right. Nevertheless, the arguments for teleoreductionism are sophisticated ones and some of its proponents hold out hope for even better arguments to come. More to the point, some of its proponents affirm reductionism because of operating background belief that, globally, reductive physicalism is a victorious view, despite ongoing local skirmishes. My objections to teleological reductionism amount to the accusation of a non-sequitor. But I do not think these objections are likely to overturn someone's background beliefs. Since I agree pretty well with Barham's analysis, I will summarize his view of the dialectic: 

>If someone were comfortable with a purely physicalist worldview that had no place in it anywhere for teleology in any form, then nothing I will say here would do much to discomfort that individual. All I claim is that, if one is already convinced of the rationality of taking at face value at least some of the teleological concepts that we employ both in everyday life and in biological discourse, then one is not required to relinquish that conviction on the basis of the notion that molecular biology and the theory of natural selection, either severally or jointly, have already settled the matter by providing us with a successful means of eliminating such concepts from biology.^[@barham 110]

This seems right to me. I am content to defend the claim that naturalistic teleological realism (and more broadly normative realism) is a live option even for the non-reductive scientific naturalist. Hence, the remainder of this chapter will examine some reasons for preferring realism to reductionism when considering normative realism in isolation, even if these reasons are not enough to overcome someone's background commitment to the contrary. 


### Reductionism

First, what does would it mean to "reduce" teleology? Barham's definition of teleoreduction, which I find adequate to my purpose, is this: 

>To reduce a putative teleological phenomenon is to give an account of the phenomenon that is both empirically and theoretically adequate and that neither employs any teleological concepts nor presupposes any other teleological phenomena.[@barham 109]

The two primary candidates for teleoreduction are causal-role reductions and natural selection reductions. Causal-role or causal-contribution explanations (endorsed by Donald Davidson, Robert Cummins and others) reduce teleological relations such as "in order to" and "for" and "to the end of" to bare cause-effect relations. For example, the function of the heart is defined in reference to its role in the oxygenation of a vertebrate's blood.  Slightly differently, natural selection stories (endorsed by Ruth Millikan and others) provide a causal-history explanation of a present day teleonomic function. Similarly, purely mechanistic natural selection pressures may result in the construction of a genetic "program" or action that has some adaptive or useful otucome without consisting of teleological process. 

Both of these reductionistic efforts are subject to worries that, to my mind, render them less plausible than simply accepting the appearances.  While philosophers may be able to patch up these accounts or offer fresh reductionistic alternatives in the future, for now, it seems that we should side with the most overall plausible explanation of natural phenomena of teleological normativity. 

### Causal-Role Reduction

Barham summarizes the causal-role positions in the recent literature on teleological and natural functions: 

>The first position, stemming from a seminal article by Cummins (1975), views being a function fundamentally as making a causal contribution (in the efficient-causal sense) to the maintenance of a larger system of which the function in question is a component part.^[@barham 111]

In that seminal article, Cummins attacks the assumptions that "(A) The point of functional characterization in science is to explain the presence of the item (organ, mechanism, process or whatever) that is functionally characterized" and "(B) For something to perform its function is for it to have certain effects on a containing system, which effects contribute to the performance of some activity of, or the maintenance of some condition in, that containing system."^[@cummins1975functional 741]Essentially, this path explains a natural function as a relation between parts and wholes. 

The natural function is not reducible to just any relation, nor even to any *causal* relation, for there are many part-whole relations that are obviously not functions. For example, the heart is not just the heart pumping part of the human body; it may also be correctly described as the "thumping sound" part of the human body. Obviously, making thumping sounds is not the function of the heart (it is at best a side-effect of its performing its function). Yet "heartsounds" and circulation are both effects of the heart's beat. So the question is how one can determine *before identifying the function* exactly which part-whole relation is the functional one? 

It does no good to assert that part A has a causal role witin organism B *after one has already presupposed an irreducibly functional analysis*. The teleoreductionist is obliged rather to show how one can distinguish teleological and non-teleological part-whole relations in absence of or prior to such presuppositions.  The teleological realist also affirms that hearts, say, play a causal role in the vertebrate's body. The teleological realist's point is that the heart is a part of the body with an irreducibly functional part  -- it pumps *in order to* circulate blood. It is *the blood pump* of the body. The teleological realist is free to identify the function of a particular body part, and then to characterize the part-whole relation in irreducibly functional terms; the teleological reductionist cannot do likewise. Relatedly, we should note that the notion of a "role" seems to be teleological. The proposition that 'the heart plays a role within the organism's circulatory system' seems, on the face, synonymous with the proposition that 'the heart *has a function* within the circulatory system.' 

### Natural Selection Reduction

One alternative (or perhaps supplement) to the causal-role answer is by appealing to the historical genesis of the organ in question. 

One strategy is to show how natural selection itself is a teleonomic or quasi-teleological process that can produce organisms with functional properties. So, to put the picture simply: define survival and reproduction as the goal-state of organisms (however this came to be); then, distinguish effects that tend toward the organism's survival and reproduction from those that do not or those that are irrelevant to that end. Circulation contributes to survival and hence is a more plausible candidate for the heart's function than making heartsounds. Simply put, we can describe the present state of the heart (including its causal-role in bodies) by referring to its historical genesis: the heart evolved  *because* it tended to the survival of certain kinds of organisms. 

The question is whether natural selection is even the right kind of explanation for, say, the pumping of the heart. Natural selection is not really a *selection* at all in the sense that *no one* is doing the selecting. Instead, natural selection is a scientific description of the process by which present day populations were preserved while others died out. So much is clear in outline, but the details matter. Specifically, natural selection explains heritable traits that (i) varied in the past and which (ii) played a role in the reproductive rates of the population.^[Thus Godfrey-Smith's summary: Evolution by natural selection is change in a population due to: (i) variation in the characteristics of members of the population, (ii) which causes different rates of reproduction, and (iii) which is inherited. (@godfrey2007conditions 515). This is only one of Godfrey-Smith's two descriptions: the more general description excludes particular real organisms in exchange for a useful degree of generality.] It does not (and is not even supposed to) explain the bare existence of an initial organism or population of organisms. Rather, the initial organism or populatuion is taken for granted, along with its complete set of reproductive and other traits. Natural selection comes in to show how the organism varies, passes on heritable traits, and gives rise to new phenotypes. Thus Barham says:

>...the functionally coordinated organism must already exist before it can be selected. On this view, we assume that the functional coordination of the organism is *prima facie* evidence of teleological determination, and since that functional coordination is presupposed by the theory of natural selection, the theory is in no position to reduce the apparent teleology in biology to mechanism.^[@barham 125]

The worry is that the process natural selection is not the *right kind* of explanation to serve as a candidate for the reduction of apparently teleological activity within individual organisms. 

When we are wondering how or why it is that the heart seems to have a definite function (to circulate blood) that is discernable from other side-effects (to make heartsounds), the question is about organismic behavior in general. Chemicals and compounds do not grow and develop and perform characteristic activities in the structured way that organisms do. My answer is that such normativity is a fundamental natural feature of organic life, a kind of brute natural law discovered a posteriori by the scientific method. The natural selection reductionist's answer that the the teleonomic function of hearts emerged out of a long history of phenotypic variation. My question is: so what? Mechanistic forces that are taking place between a population and its environment (droughts, famines) or within a population's genetics (genetic drift, normal reproduction) are compatible with a parallel teleological forces. Indeed, Barham suggests that the burgeoning field of evolutionary developmental biology might be able to supply some of the connections between these two kinds of process. He calls "phenotypic accommodation" the distinct process of "inherent compensatory or adaptive capacity of organisms" -- or simply homeostasis.^[@barham 131] The scientific hypothesis some are investigating^[@shapiro2009revisiting] seems to be that these two processes are separately necessary but only jointly sufficient causes to explain the presence of a trait (like pumping hearts) in a population.

Another proponent of natural selection reduction strategies is Ruth Millikan.^[@millikan1989defense] This strategy: 

> takes a present trait’s being a function to be equivalent to its having been naturally selected due to the fitness advantage conferred on an organism by the physical effects of the ancestral trait of the same type from which the present trait-token is descended.^[@barham2011 9]

The idea here is that ancestral organisms had such-and-such phenotypes which, after many generations of reproduction, conferred hearts upon present-day vertebrates. A consequence of Millikan's view is that an organism’s "proper function" simply cannot be read off its present capacities; we can't just observe that hearts *seem to be for circulating blood* and infer from this observation that they are, indeed, for circulating blood. Rather, the proper function of a (present-day) heart can only be identified by its empirical history. 

Two implausible corollaries are that if we discovered two heart-like organisms (suppose one is extraterrestrial) with distinct evolutionary parentages, then they would have to be classified as having different functions despite both circulating blood. More hypothetically, "Swampman" arguments press a similar point. Suppose an exact material replica of Donald Davidson spontaneously emerged from a swamp; on Millikan's theory, even though the Swampman is equipped with a heart and lungs and legs and eyelids, none of these has *any* "proper function". Millikan bites the bullet on both of these implausible corollaries.  

The point of these examples is not to challenge the details of empirical origin stories but to separate the *concept* of having a (present day) functional capacity from the *concept* of having an empirical, evolutionary history. These concepts come apart in several ways: Useless vestigial organs have an empirical history but no  present day functional capacity; spandrals have a present-day functional capacity with no direct, primary selection history; the language capacities in say, the right hemisphere of the brain brain *can* be taken over by the left hemisphere in the case of injury or lobotomy, presumably because the brain is (present-day) adaptible and not because the brain function redudancy was selected for in every individual case. These counterexamples demonstrate *at least* function and history conceptually can come apart. 

What is the alternative? In Barham's view, functions are "essentially modal, not historical, concepts"^[@barham 139]. He quotes Fodor's vivid statement that: "my heart’s function has less to do with its evolutionary origins than with the current truth of such counterfactuals as that if it were to stop pumping my blood, I’d be dead."^[@fodor2001mind 86-7; cited in @barham 138.] If we made contact with extraterrestrials whose blood-like liquid was circulated by a pump-like organ, how could we discern whether it was a heart? We could query about the historical genesis of the organ on that planet, but we would first rightly query: *what would happen if that organ stopped pumping?* If the Alpha Centaurians, too, would die without the beating of that organ, we would justifiably call the organ a 'heart' even though it had a very different history. 

Barham cautions against, "imagining that 'selection history' could confer normative value on a biological function in the same way that pedigree confers value on a horse, or provenance on a painting."^[@barham 140] "History" is not a special power but is simply the set of physical interactions over time. The question about which set of physical interactions over time that produced X might be (and I think is) intimately related to questions about the function of X; the point is that they are two different questions. Michael Thompson, too, insists that judgments about natural teleology are made true from the form of life under question, not from “hypotheses about the past”.[Cf. @thompson1995representation 293. Christopher Toner adds that judgments about natural teleological facts are made true regardless of the origin of the facts, “whether about creation or natural selection.”[@toner2008sorts 223.] This seems right to me. It does not matter for present purposes *how* the function came to be, just whether or not it really *is* at present.] Barham is right to point out that the problem with Aristotle's views of biology (say, believing that the seat of perception was not in the brain) was not that he lacked knowledge of evolution, but that he lacked an adequate knowledge of physiology. 

I can only conlude from this brief discussion that these reductionistic strategies are not very promising. 'Not very promising' is a far cry from 'hopeless'. There may one day be a successful reduction of teleonomic phenomena "that is both empirically and theoretically adequate and that neither employs any teleological concepts nor presupposes any other teleological phenomena." But today is not that day. The scientific perspective of empirical biology conforms most closely to the commonsense perspective that hearts are for pumping blood. 

### Coming to terms with teleology

The three paths I mentioned above are to accept, reduce, or reject natural normativity. I cited reasons to think rejecting and reducing are not promising paths. In closing, I would like to offer some reassurance to those who might be anxious about the prospect of accepting normative realism whole clothe. My reassurance boils down to the belief that appeal to natural normativity is a live  *scientific* belief. While natural teleological realism is still controversial, it is not a controversy between science and philosophy but a controversy *within science*. 

Thomas Nagel took a lot of heat for his recent philosophical defense of scientific, Darwinian, natural teleology.[@nagel2012mind] However, Michael Chorost does not accuse Nagel of obscurantism but chastises him for *failing to cite the science*. He says: 

>Natural teleology is unorthodox, but it has a long and honorable history. For example, in 1953 the evolutionary biologist Julian Huxley argued that it's in the nature of nature to get more advanced over time. "If we take a snapshot view, improvement eludes us," he wrote. "But as soon as we introduce time, we see trends of improvement."...^[@chorost2013thomas.] 

Teleological realism in biology fell into disfavor with Francis Bacon's superstitious belief that the search for final causes corrupted science.[^24] The proper reply to Bacon is that the teleological nihilism hypothesis has been tried and found wanting. 

Modern science is no less teleological than it was in the 16th century; perhaps even more so. Arnhart persuasively argues that teleology is irreplacably assumed in medicine.[@arnhart1988] Zammito clarifies its ongoing relevance in biology, since organisms seem to be intrinsically purposeful.[@zammito2006teleology]  Fitzpatrick says that, “While neo-Darwinian evolutionary theory does soundly reject any appeal to teleology in the process of evolution itself, there is a large literature in contemporary philosophy of biology defending the legitimacy of employing teleological concepts in connection with adaptations.”[@sepmoralitybiology] Darwin himself might have been a teleologist.[@lennox1993darwin; @lennox1992teleology] Whether Darwin's theory of natural selection *undermines* and debunks or *underwrites* and justifies the teleological view at least debatable. 

[^24]: Cf. Bacon, *New Organon*, Book I. XLVIII “Although the most general principles in nature ought to be held merely positive, as they are discovered, and cannot with truth be referred to a cause, nevertheless the human understanding being unable to rest still seeks something prior in the order of nature. And then it is that in struggling toward that which is further off it falls back upon that which is nearer at hand, namely, on final causes, which have relation clearly to the nature of man rather than to the nature of the universe; and from this source have strangely defiled philosophy.”


