*Section 5 begins to apply the foregoing account of human nature and natural human norms to ethics. Specifically, I shall argue that as practical, rational animals, a a basic human norm is that one is to become a fully mature human being. Practical primates have prima facie normative obligation to be what they are (to respect the conditions and criteria of their life form) and a prima facie obligation to become fully mature practical primates.*

## Natural Norms, Human Norms, Ethical Norms

If the argument has been successful thus far, then best evidence suggests that human beings are practical, rational primates. What is the ethical significance of this proposition? 


Firstly, on the basis of the previous chapter's arguments, there are natural norms arising from the conditions of our animal nature. Candidates to be an example of such norms can be expressed in generic propositions about human animals, for instance: "animals beings sleep daily". Accordance with such norms would be genuinely good for humans and deviation from them genuinely bad. Importantaly, such norms are not *only* accessible to us, but would be accessible to an "alien anthropologist" observing humanity from the "outside".  This is the sort of naturalistic evaluation Foot, Hursthouse, and McDowell are aiming for. Just as the scientist evaluates members of a species by how well or badly it exemplifies its particular life form, human beings are evaluable by how well or badly they exemplify their particular life form.  Just as we can evaluate an individual wolf by reference to its life form, perhaps we can evaluate individual human characters and abilities, human actions and lives by reference to our life form. Some evaluations are not obviously ethical:  starving to death, being born without limbs, being involuntarily infertile, seem to be bads-of-a-kind for creatures like us. They are not *moral* bads, but real misfortunes. The question to be pursued, then, is whether any natural human norms can be shown to be fully ethical norms.

This is the second bit of ethical significance. Things get really interesting (and rather more difficult) when we consider human beings not as mere brutes but as reflective brutes. The difference between humans and wolves is that wolves are not rational animals. So, when it comes to humans, we continue to evaluate on the basis of their species, but we evaluate not just their health and normal developmental stages, and their maturity, but their *actions*. Michael Thompson summarizes: 

>...  will and practical reason are on the face of it just two more faculties or powers a living being may bear, on a level with the powers of sight and hearing an memory. The second crucial thought is that an individual instance of any of the latter powers — sight, hearing, memory — is intuitively to be judged as defective or sound, good or bad, well-working or ill-working, by reference to its bearer's life-form or kind or species.[@thompson2008life 29]

So, the neo-Aristotelian hypothesis is that some such norms are candidates for classification as *natural ethical norms.* These are special instances of natural norms that apply to humans as a species of a peculiar sort. A candidate to be an example of such a norm "human beings reason about their decisions" or "human beings become wiser over time."  

If such propositions can be demonstrated to be natural, human, ethical norms, then they would describe "the normal human" -- not statistically normal, but the one in conformity with our species-type. Lest I seem to be sneaking in "purely" ethical norms, consider the possibility that whatever is *naturally good* for humans is ipso facto *morally good*: even innocuous, "merely biological" goods like sleep, air, and healthy food.  "Human beings breathe, sleep, and eat" is not just a description but a normative generic. A human being who *could* eat but does not eat would be ipso facto defective. 

If natural human norms are natural norms, then they would be momentous. Such norms  would pertain to every individual human, regardless of culture and upbringing. The hypothesis to be developed is that the obligation to acquire virtues is just such a binding, natural, ethical norm. We are obligated to become what we truly are. 

All I want to suggest for now is that our complete nature as practical, rational primates has *at least prima facie* ethical significance. A defeasible normative obligation to get good sleep can be overcome by citing a countervailing reason -- such as the need to stay up and feed the baby or the need to stay on duty at one's late-night post -- while still acknowledging that it is a normative obligation arising from our animal nature. The defeasibility of such norms brings up the "Irrelevance Objection." If norms can be overcome, what do they matter at all? Prima facie normative bindingnness is not *everything* but it is *not nothing*. I shall have to address the Irrelevance Objection fully in its own chapter. 

For now, we must consider how putative human norms relate to virtue. The notion is that virtues are a specific type of quality belonging to creatures like us. Virtues are the human specific goods-of-a-kind. The virtues constitue a set of normative constraints on what one can/should be and can/should become arising from one's nature as a practical primate. 

Relatedly, the acquisition of virtues both causes and constitutes the actualization of our life form as practical rational primates. Truly exemplifying our life form constitutes our species-specific flourishing. Virtues are commonly supposed to be "excellences" of human beings. Relative to what is such a quality excellent? The answer can only be that virtues are excellences relative to our nature or life form. They are the traits or qualities that enable us to actualize our life form, to fully express in a life what we are by nature. If what we are by nature is practical, rational primates, then virtues (we can further predict) will be traits pertaining to practical reason and animality. 

Furthermore, if our nature is to be practical, rational primates, then we have some vague notion of our natural "function." I shall not go in for the Aristotelian view that the natural work (ergon) of human beings is contemplative science, an activity by reference to which success and failure may be judged. Rather, I shall be more ecumenical: the telos of every life form is, minimally, to do all the activities that constitute its mature flourishing.  So we should predict quite generally that the human telos is to become *fully mature* practical, rational primates. The conceptions of human nature (as practical reasoning animals) must be defined in relation to virtue (the excellences of rational practice and practical reason) and to human nature as it could be, our natural telos (to be excellent and mature practical, rational primates). 

Becoming fully or fully actualized practical rational animals requires the actualization not only of our animal nature (through growth, maturity, reproduction) but our rational potential (through intellectual growth and knowledge, and practical wisdom that sublimates all of one's emotions and bodily desires and physical settings into a good life). In other words:  Humans are to become practical, rational animals. Hursthouse points out that we do not just admire those who survive but who exemplify a *human* form of life: "The human virtues make their possessor good qua human being, one who is as ordinarily well fitted as a human being can be in not merely physical respects to live well, to flourish -- in a characteristically human way." [@hursthouse1998virtue 208.]

As a generic, the proposition that humans are practical, rational primates is both descriptive and normative. If practical rational animals is what we are (by nature), then the pattern of natural normativity would lead us to expect that becoming truly or fully practical rational animals is our natural telos. This thought, I think, explains why Peter Geach says “Men need virtues as bees need stings."[@geach1977virtues 17] Philippa Foot and Alasdair MacIntyre echo this talk of "need" and "necessity" as well. (MacIntyre's most recent monograph is subtitlted,: "why human beings need the virtues."[@macintyre1999dependent]) The kind of necessity being predicated here is the same kind of necessity with which a bee needs a sting or a knife needs to be sharp. It is a formal and teleological necessity. 

A norm that obliges us to pursue a certain range of forms of life -- and to avoid others -- is that we are practical rational primates. What are those forms of life? 

The qualities of excellence for practical rational animals would be the moral and intellectual virtues, including moderation and immoderation, justice and injustice, practical wisdom and foolishness, and so on. 

To identify these virtues requires, in part, looking to exemplary humans. If "human" is a normative concept, then the exemplars from which to derive our notion of humanity would not be someone in process of fully actuating that life form or who has already failed to do. The exemplar from which to derive a concept of humanity would not be, for example, the criminally insane, or  children, not the critically ill or the handicaped, but the fully mature, practical rational primates. The traits of such a person are liable to be admirable and praiseworthy for creatures like us. 

The qualities human beings acquire on the way to becoming fully practical, rational animals are virtues.  Virtues are those qualities needed by us as members of the human species, each member of which exemplifies the same human nature of being a potentially practical, rational animals.  Thus Hursthouse again: “The concept of a virtue is the concept of something that makes its possessor good: a virtuous person is a morally good, excellent or admirable person who acts and feels well, rightly, as she should. These are commonly accepted truisms.”[@sepvirtue] 

### Traits That Benefit

What we have said so far points in the direction of the hypothesis: virtues must be instances of natural goodness or natural excellence for practical, rational primates like ourselves. Virtues must be a subset of natural goods, or goods-of-a-kind for human beings. Furthermore, they must be recognizably good from the outside and the inside; that is, not only should at least some virtues correspond to the standard list of qualities that are admired universally or near universally, such as courage and justice, but in order to block the charge of subjectivism, they should be plausibly recognizable by an alien anthropologist who could study the human life form and discover which traits actuate it. 

More specifically, virtues on my account will turn out to be qualities that enable one to be fully become a primate (and animal and organism more generally): as mortal creatures and animals, our biological life consists of a process of maturation, nutrition, rest, exercise, homeostatic maturity, reproduction, characteristic activities, aging, and death. Many human goods enable this process, from oxygen, food, sleep, and so on. Virtues may not be material things but are likely to relate to such material and emotional parts of a normal human life. 

Human virtues would also be those qualities that enable one to perform  characteristically rational activities such as speaking, socializing, thoughtful acting, and creating. By nature, we are inherently self-aware language-users who grow up and live in a language-community with a history and tradition, and who are curious to know what is true about ourselves and our world. We are also extravagantly innovative, creating myriad tools, forms of art, and other products for our use and enjoyment. We are inherently conscious and self-conscious beings who speak, interpret, and create in the context of a linguistic community such as a family, society, and culture. And as *practical* rational animals, we are inherently goal-oriented and self-determining beings who are to some degree able to acquire new traits or lose them, able to achieve our natural ends or fail to achieve them, able to become aware of the "givenness" of our biology and work with or against it, and are able to treat an entire biological life not only as an event but as a project. Although we are pushed about by our biological instincts and by social pressures, we do not *simply* stumble around through life; at times we also act on *reasons*. That is, we deliberate about future actions, and reflect on past actions, and become puzzled about what is called for in the present. The success of our actions is not guaranteed, and the reasonableness of our justifications is not guaranteed. Rather, we muddle through on the best evidence we have. 

The criteria of a definition of virtue, then, is that the excellences intrinsic to our life form are those qualities that practical rational animals per se *need* to be what they are and to live life in such a way as to become what they can potentially become.  

Just as importantly, *natural badness* would be the property or set of properties that practical rational animals *need to avoid*. The category of natural evils is expansive: hunger, exposure to predators or extreme temperatures, disease, accidental injury, and premature death. In some sense, each of these frustrates one's development toward the natural end of being a fully mature practical reasoner and hence partly constitute species-specific misery. But the sub-set of natural evils we should call 'vices' would be those acquirable qualities that we inflict upon ourselves and others. 

### Intrinsic Goods

I need to make a few clarifying points. The first clarification is that virtues are intrinsic goods. They enable one to be a practical, rational primate, but they are more than instrumentally valuable. Virtues on my account will also turn out to be constitutive of humanity. It may seem to odd to categorize essential properties of humanity as morally praiseworthy traits. But the point is essential to my case. Virtues are not just "morally praiseworthy" qualities; they are *the human* qualities. Virtues are examples of *humanness* in its exemplary form. 

I grant that the notion that virtues are "the human" qualities is a reversal on the all-too-common mistake that "human" qualities are neutral with respect to moral praise or blame. The reason for this reversal of, as  I tried to argue above, is that all life forms discovered by scientific investigation and articulated in generic propositions are inherently normative. Hence, the concept of human nature cannot and should not be value-neutral. Rather, as Micah Lott points out, the concept of human nature:

>...must embody a normatively significant understanding of human life and action. For any conception of human form is a natural-historical account of ‘how the human lives.’ As with ‘the tiger’ or ‘the mayfly,’ a natural-history of ‘the human’ provides an interpretation of the characteristic and non-defective life-cycle of the species.[@lott2012moral 770-1]

### Biological and Rational Goods

The particular virtues would be particular expressions of the kind of natural goodness appropriate to creatures like us. Lott continues: "And as both Aristotelians and their critics emphasize, humans possess a faculty of practical reason."[@lott2012moral 770-1] So natural goodness in humans (and hence virtues) would be somehow related to the faculty of practical reason. 

This is the second clarifying remark: virtues must pertain to both our animal and rational aspects. Human beings can and ought to become what they are, and completely so. 

What difference does practical reasoning make? Is it enough to ruin the continuity between humans and other natural organisms? That is, does the presence of the capacity for practical reasoning render irrelevant the conditions of our physical and organic nature irrelevant for ethical purposes? This is a very important objection and a later chapter attempts a satisfying response.

For now, my primary concern is to concede that practical reason makes a real difference between humans and other less rational or non-rational organisms. This concession does not harm the case. Far from refuting the continuity between humanity and the rest of nature, this concession reinforces the case. 

For if practical reasoning is one of our capacities like sight and hearing, then just as we have license to say that blindness or deafness is a disability, the inability to practical reasoning would be a disability. In other words,  with the emergence of practical reason as one of the capacities of the human species comes the emergence of a new standard for evaluating a member of the species: namely, how *well* one can practically reason. 

Practical reasoning is not just a process of deciding what to do by running a calculus or a two-column ledger; it requires sensitivity to a range of reasons, both external to oneself (facts and states of affairs) and internal to one's own psychology (desires, fears) and physiology (weakness, hunger), etc. Success, if such be possible, would mean taking up the basic facts of one's biology, psychology, and social anthropology into a space of reasons, and the basic facts of the situation in which one finds oneself, weighing and ranking reasons for action, and acting. And, having considered the whole range of facts and reasons, the virtuous person then constructs a "pattern that, given the human situation, is likely to lead a good life."[@kekes1983wisdom 280] 

I do not mean to suggest that such evaluations are quick and easy. Evaluating someone's ability to practically reason is no easy task. For Smith to evaluate Jones requires Smith to practically reason *about* Jones' practical reasoning. Any errors Smith makes *while reasoning* about Jones are liable to result in misjudgments *about Jones*. Even worse, practical reason is self-referential or recursive. That is, practical reason is the capacity by which the practical reasoning animal reflects upon the proper or improper uses of practical reason itself. For Smith to self-reflect -- for Smith to evalaute *Smith*'s own practical reasoning' -- requires Smith to *use* practical reasoning. Self-reflection is putting the microscope itself under the microscope.^[I shall have much more to say about the labrynthine difficulties of practical reasoning in a later chapter.]

According to my hypothesis thus far, particular virtues enable the exemplification of our life form, and the excellence of practical reason enable us to pursue our ends *well*. The practical, rational agents who consistently succeed at pursuing and achieving their ends would be models of virtue. 

### Unity of Virtues

A third clarification is that, while I have been suggesting that there is only one set of such traits and that there is only one type of mature, flourishing practical reasoner, I am aware that I have not yet argued for any unity. I would suggest that most kinds of misery are the same but there might be a million different types of human flourishing. Only a great novelist like Tolstoy could get away with saying something so stupid as that every unhappy family is different. Therapists and psychiatrists hear the same sad stories over and over again. But I do not insist on the point. 


### Conclusion


We can put the argument of this chapter compactly like this: 

**Natural Human Norms Argument**

P1. All natural organisms exhibit formal and functional (i.e., teleological) facts which are expressible in generics -- these are natural norms. (Ethical Naturalism, from Chapter 2)
P2. Human beings are natural organisms of a peculiar sort.  (Assumption)
C1. Therefore, human beings exhibit formal and teleological facts which are expressible in generics; there are *human* norms. (From P1-P2)
P3. For any organism M, the excellences or virtues of M are the qualities that enable and partly constitute its being a fully mature M. 
P4. Human beings are practical, rational primates. (Human Nature)
C2. For humanity, the excellences or virtues of a human being are the qualities that enable and partly constitute its becoming a fully practical, rational primate. (From P3-P4)
P6. For humanity, virtues are rational practices and practical reasoning. 
C3. Therefore, for humanity, rational practices and practical reasoning enable persons and societies to become -- and partly constitute their becoming -- fully practical, rational primates.




