

## Introduction

The neo-Aristotelian account I have been developed shows how human natural norms are instances of a broader category of natural norms. These human norms are, for us, practical reasons. They provide normative guidance on how to live. Unless tragedy, injury, defect, and illness interrupt the process, a young human being naturally matures into the sort of practical rational primate who is capable of asking and answering the question of how to live. I have also argued for a conception of traditional virtues such as courage, moderation, and practical wisdom. These virtues represent good answers to the question of how to live; one ought to develop such virtues in oneself. A virtuous enjoy the benefits to oneself and others that virtues bring and enable one to resist common temptations to immorality, vice, and practical folly. 

Hans Fink points out that an ethical naturalist is "someone who insists on a fundamental continuity between the ethical and the natural."[@fink 203.] One of the attractions of the Footian sort of neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism is that it provides a unified account of human nature and the rest of non-human nature. Contra McDowell, a natural normative life form and natural normative ends are not exclusive to practically reasoning creatures like us. Every organism pursues its own goods -- survival, reproduction, the exemplification of its proper life form. As Julia Annas says: 

>What is so helpful for ethics from this kind of biological naturalism is that we find that the normativity of our ethical discourse is not something which emerges mysteriously with humans and can only be projected back, in an anthropomorphic way, onto trees and their roots. Rather, we find normativity in the realm of living things, plants and animals, already. It is part of the great merit of the work of Philippa Foot... to have stressed this point. Like many important philosophical points, it is obvious once pointed out...”[@annas2005naturalism] 

Nevertheless, Foot's organic naturalism is far from "obvious" to some. One of the alleged drawbacks, according to John McDowell, John Hacker-Wright, and others, is that "Foot's naturalism draws on a picture of the biological world at odds with the view embraced by most scientists and philosophers."[@hacker2009natural 308] Though I have tried to diffuse this worry chapter 2, it is quite likely that iterations of the same present new difficulties. Furthermore, humans are aware of and partially in control their own life form and natural, normative ends. Other organisms are not. The self-reflective nature of human life creates special philosophical problems for the sort of naturalism I have developed.  For example, is evaluative practical reasoning fundamentally the same as natural, scientific reasoning? If so, then how could it be normative? If not, then is she defending a "Kantian" sort of evaluative practical reasoning rather than a naturalistic one?[@hacker2009natural 309] 

The purpose of this chapter is to state, in some detail, a series of remaining objections and explain specifically how the conclusions already defended are adequate to resolve them. 

Section 2 sets up the discussion by presenting Chris Toner's four requirements that a successful neo-Aristotelian naturalism must meet if it is to overcome the sort of criticisms McDowell poses. I provide further details on how my account thus far has already satisfied three of the four. 

Section 3 argues that McDowell's alternative to Footian naturalism runs aground of Toner's fourth requirement. I detail McDowell's concepts of "first nature" and "second nature". Since his paradoxical views have caused some consternation among his philosophical readers, I first offer an explanation of his beguiling metaphilosophical project. I then explain how he deploys these concepts in his ethical project. 

Section 4 presents the major flaw with McDowell's account of nature. I draw from Hans fink to distinguish three different conceptions of nature and natural science and three corresponding philosophical naturalisms. I argue that McDowell's conception is tries to draw from two and the result is incoherence. On either of two plausible conceptions of nature and the natural, my account demonstrates that practical reasoning is natural reasoning. 

Section 5 highlights two more flaws in McDowell's account. In short, he unwittingly falls into the very sort of undesirable nature/human dualism he emphatically wishes to avoid. 

Section 6 reiterates how my Footian account of virtue and practical reason (developed in chapters 4 and 5) are more adequate to the task of meeting Toner's fourth requirement.




## Four Requirements

A recent article by Chris Toner argues that neo-Aristotelians (such as Foot and Michael Thompson) have not yet adequately responded to McDowell's objections and satisfied four requirements "naturalism must deliver if it is to support a revived Aristotelian virtue ethics...”[@toner2008sorts 222] Gladly, our account thus far has satisfied three of the four. 

The first requirement is that *natural norms must be intrinsically able to motivate the bearer of the nature.* Put differently, the natural human norms pertaining to our nature must be, for us, practical reasons.  In chapter 5, I argued that practical reasons, by definition, motivate us. Practical reasoning is not one of many ways of being motivated but is the very capacity to be motivated by reasons. Plants and animals are inclined or motivated to their good by instinct or irrational appetite. They cannot pause to reflect on whether they should follow through on the instinctual flight from predators or pursuit of food and shelter.  Humans are inclined by their good *both* by instinct (and emotion, desire, etc.) *and* by reason.  I also argued above that the object of human practical reasoning is a quite general conception of what is good. By 'good' we don't mean a non-natural property apprehended theoretically but the something intrinsically practical: the choice-worthy, the desirable, the to-be-pursued. As Frey clarifies:

>Although natural inclinations depend upon conceptual apprehension, we should not be tempted to think that they are objects of contemplation. These goods, as first principles of practical reason, are apprehended as ends—as objects of pursuit rather than as objects of contemplative knowledge.[@frey 88]

While there are many sources of motion in a human being (urges, desires, instincts),  practical reasoning is unique process of taking these as prima facie practical reasons, reflecting on them, and organizing all our practical reasons into rational plan for what to do, all things considered.

This conclusion goes a long way to solving what Jennifer Frey calls the "Irrelevance Problem." She says: 

>[Irrelevance] is a more sophisticated presentation of the so-called ‘naturalistic fallacy.’  But rather than crudely rejecting any move from ‘is’ to ‘ought’, it merely blocks the inference at one crucial juncture—the inference from the ‘is’ of the species, to the ‘ought’ that governs the rational will.[@frey 14]  

As we saw in chapter 5, McDowell argues that granting the existence of natural human norms to seek food, shelter, comfort, survival, society, and so on, these norms are not necessarily binding. His discussion of the "rational wolf" illustrates the objection.  Although a wolf is "supposed to" hunt in packs because that is a formal property of its nature, if a wolf were endowed with *logos*it would be just as free as human beings are to step back from such natural norms and either endorse or reject them. Nevertheless, even this higher order adjudication is subject to natural norms of practical reasoning. A practical rational primate ought to order his or her natural inclinations according to what is, all things considered, good for human beings. Even though I find within myself the desire, say, to eat good food, such norms impinge on me to eat certain things at certain times and in ways. A habitual glutton might feel a craving to overeat between meals, but decide that, all things considered, it is better to be moderate. Or an anorexic might feel psychological pressures to eat too little, but decide that, all things considered, it is better to get the needed nourishment.

Toner's second requirement is this: *natural norms must be intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of the nature.* Natural human norms must not be merely given; they must somehow justify themselves. Upon reflection must reveal that the norms are *good* practical reasons to all rational agents. The norms need not, Toner admits, *automatically* persuade a Callicles to repent of his wickedness. However, it must be *able to* become justifiable motivations under normal circumstances. He says: 

>...I say "intrinsically able to motivate or justify" rather than "intrinsically motivating or justifying": the natural norm is such that it can motivate or convince persons, provided they are not in too dysfunctional a state. In the same way a rose is such as to be intrinsically able to convince us of its being red. Its failure actually to do so in my case because I am color-blind or jaundiced does not impugn this intrinsic ability. Natural norms can motivate and convince because they are neither "mere facts" about the way a given species does go on nor "brute desires" a given species happens to have as a result of its evolutionary history.[@toner2008sorts 235]

It is true that mere general descriptive facts do not motivate and that simple brute desires to behave in a certain way are not necessarily overriding motivators. However, as I have argued in chapters 2 and 3, natural norms are not reducible to either mere facts or brute desires. Rather, natural norms both characterize what traits count as virtues for practical rational creatures like us, and are intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of that nature. 

This requirement affords the opportunity to respond to what Elijah Millgram calls the "Pollyanna problem", according to which any honest, empirical assessment of human natural norms would include vicious norms as well as virtuous ones because justice and injustice are both statistically "normal."[^86] Anscombe anticipates this worry when she says: 

>The search for "norms" might lead someone to look for laws of nature, as if the universe were a legislator; but in the present day this is not likely to lead to good results: it might lead one to eat the weaker according to the laws of nature, but would hardly lead anyone nowadays to notions of justice.[@anscombe1958 14] 

[^86]: @andreou2006getting; @millgram2005reasonably; @woodcock2006philippa. 

Millgram et. al., might object that I was winking at the dark side of human nature when I built my inductive case for the generic that the human beings are practical rational primates. After all, empirical sociology can establish the truth of such generics as: politicians lie, sociopaths murder, businesses cheat, criminals steal, countries wage unjust war, parents abuse their children, and so on. Likewise, empirical biology shows that some acorns become fully grown, mature oaks, but other acorns become stultified, sickly specimens. (Most acorns never become anything other than acorns before they disintegrate into dust in the soil.) Some animals protect their young while other animals abandon or even consume their young. Are we supposed to allow, then, that "Human beings abandon their young" is a generic truth, indicative of the human life form? Are we obligated to fulfill all such norms? Just some? Which ones?

I think this problem, while important, is ultimately specious. The generic that humans are practical rational primates who can mature into practically wise and virtuous agents is not a mere generalization. When we examine the behaviors of organisms, we make begin with generalizations. Even constructing scientific accounts of organisms, we do not stop there, but sift through them. Some remain mere generalizations about how some creatures happen to behave, while others are classified as essential or natural to how that creature behaves. The latter are natural norms. And this sifting process is one and them same, whether in scientific or ethical accounts. Moral and rational defects can be overwhelmingly common. Regardless of how statistically common the failure to conform to such norms, the discernment between virtuous and vicious is akin to the discernment between healthy specimens and unhealthy ones, normal animals and pathological ones. Indeed, part of having a properly-formed mind is that one distinguish between natural norms and mere generalizations. 

For example, the National Geographic narrates how a sloth bear in Washington D.C. gave birth in captivity to three cubs. The first one was immediately killed and eaten by the mother, but the second were nurtured and cared for. The zookeepers were appalled. When, after a week of caring for the remaining cubs, the mother killed and ate another, they intervened to save the third.^[Virginia Morell (2014, March 28).  "Why Do Animals Sometimes Kill Their Babies?". *National Geographic* (March 28, 2014). Accessed online. http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2014/03/140328-sloth-bear-zoo-infanticide-chimps-bonobos-animals/] This event posed the question: is something wrong with the mother bear? First, the zookeepers observe the facts: the mother ate one cub and nurtured (temporarily) the other two. Then they made two quite different generalizations: (1) mother bears care for their young, and (2) mother bears kill and eat their young. The contradiction demands sifting. The zookeepers then discerned which is the natural norm.  University of Southern California primatologist Craig Stanford points out that the consensus among biologists is to affirm the generic truth: a mother cares for her young. As a normative generic, we can say without a change in meaning that a mother bear is *supposed* to care for her young, and hence that infanticide is pathological. New data can confirm or disconfirm this evaluative judgment. For instance, the third cub of the sloth bear whom the zookeepers intervened to save turned out to suffer an elevated white blood cell count. It is possible that the other cubs were sick as well. The zookeepers speculated that the mother somehow knew this and so killed the ailing cubs. If this were true, it would give rise to a new generic: a mother cares for her healthy young. If it turned out that the two other cubs were *not* in fact ailing, the mother's behavior would be classified as pathological.

Similarly for humans and other primates.^[@goodall1977infant] Psychologist Christine Lawson narrates the horrifying story when, in 1992, a mother drowned her two young children in order to ingratiate herself to a man she was dating who said, offhandedly, that he did not want children: 

>Susan Smith drove to a lake near Union, South Carolina, and parked her car at the top of a boat ramp. She stepped out of the car, released the parking break, and let the car roll into the water with her babies strapped inside. Covering her ears with her hands so she could not hear their screams, she ran up the ramp as the car rolled toward the lake. It too six minutes for the car to sink, drifting away from the ramp, bobbing nose first into the water. David Smith, the father of Alex and Michael, recollected: there we're some troubling things that I learned in the aftermath of the killings... There's only one conclusion I could make. Susan has watch the car as it sank. This was too awful, too terrible to imagine. Susan waiting, seeing Michael and Alex die. If that were true, there is no doubt something truly evil and Susan's character, something unspeakable.^[@lawson2000understanding 122]

Statistically, the vast majority of human parents do an adequate job. We do not posit "parents care for their children" as a mere statistical likelihood that admits of exceptions. Rather, psychologists correctly judge such exceptional cases of parental indifference and cruelty as normative errors.  

This particular parent was not merely a statistical anomaly but an example of a psychological disorder (in this case, Borderline Personality Disorder). Understanding and labeling her disorder should not lead us to soften the normative evaluation of her actions. Many Borderline parents manage their disorder and do an adequate job in spite of it. Susan Smith's behavior was criminal, but it was also pathological and -- as David Smith said, truly evil.  Lawson explains that "Susan Smith sacrifice for children in order not to be abandoned by her boyfriend, the wealthy heir to the towns largest industry."[@lawson2000understanding 123] To take a significant others' offhand comment about not wanting children *as a reason* to murder one's own is a devastating error in practical reasoning.  The correct practical reasoning is almost too obvious to need stating: There is *good reason*to take care of one's child. Parents are *supposed to* care for their young, even when doing so is difficult or costly. These natural norms seem to me excellent examples of the sort of natural norms that are intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of human nature. 

The same pattern holds when constructing norms pertaining to a whole host of virtues. As Toner mentions, "The requirements of the virtues can be articulated into what Hursthouse calls v-rules (do what is just, what is courageous, and so forth)."[@toner2008sorts 242] I would articulate such norms or "v-rules" in the form of generics: human beings do what is just, what is wise, etc. The generic picks out what human beings naturally do; the failure to do so is, accordingly, a defect. 

Toner's third requirement is this: *natural norms must be anchored in and express universal human nature.* In chapter 3 I defended a definition of "universal human nature," that we are practical rational primates. And I argued that the natural norm that one ought to become a fully mature practical rational primate (as represented by virtuous and wise exemplars) is successfully "anchored in" that nature.  More specifically, all the virtues of rational practice and practical reasoning are examples of such norms. For, as Toner says: 

>... the possession and exercise of the virtues is essential to human flourishing as dependent rational animals. Thus natural norms or the requirements of the virtues, in articulating what we need (to have, to be, to do) to flourish, are anchored in and express universal human nature.[@toner2008sorts 242] 

There are many examples of natural norms that philosophers plausible take to be intrinsically justifying to human beings. Thus, Shafer-Landau: 

>It seems to me self-evident that, other things equal, it is wrong to take pleasure in another's pain, to taunt and threaten the vulnerable, to prosecute and punish those known to be innocent, and to sell another's secrets solely for personal gain.[@shafer2003moralrealism, chapter 11]

Richard Boyd follows Hilary Putnam in calling such norms "quasi-analytic": 

>Indeed, many fundamental scientific laws (as well as some scientific truisms) and many fundamental moral principles have the property which we might call quasi-analyticity (see, e.g., Putnam 1962). Because of their conceptual and methodological centrality, even when we know that their justification is a posteriori rather than a priori, we find it extremely difficult to envision circumstances under which they would be disconfirmed. For as long as they occupy so central a conceptual and methodological role, they are immune from empirical revision, and principles incompatible with them are ineligible for empirical confirmation (let’s call them quasi-analytically ineligible). As Putnam indicates, quasi-analyticity and quasi-analytic ineligibility can be altered only by pretty serious conceptual and theoretical “revolutions,” whose directions are all but impossible to anticipate prior to the innovations or crises which precipitate them. The principle that torturing children is wicked and the fundamental laws of quantum mechanics are both candidates for quasi-analyticity.[@boyd2003finite 520]

Recalling Frey's discussion of Aquinas "first principle of practical reason" can help us to draw the proper relation between these norms of morality and norms of practical reason. That fundamental normative principle was that good is to be done and pursued, and evil is to be avoided. This principle provides that major premise for a practical syllogism behind every rational action, where the minor premise is some virtually unrevisable evaluative judgment: e.g., evil is to be avoided, and torturing children is evil, therefore torturing children is to be avoided; good is to be pursued, loyalty is good, therefore loyalty is to be pursued. Practically irrationality does not arise when judges that good is to be avoided and evil pursued but when one makes fundamental mistake about what is good or evil and, hence, judges it to be the thing to do. 

Toner's fourth requirement is this: *first and second nature must be related so that the second is a natural outgrowth of the first, and so that that in our given makeup is (first) natural which does tend toward an ethically mature second nature.* McDowell aims to satisfy this requirement by appealing to "second nature". He says he aims to "formulate a conception of reason that is, in one sense, naturalistic: a formed state of practical reason is one's second nature, not something that dictates to one's nature from outside."[@mcdowell1998two] It is clear that he does not wish to fall into a dualism between biology and rationality. Nevertheless, I believe that a consistent reading of McDowell's account will show that he falls short of meeting this fourth requirement.  


## First and Second Nature

In order to make good on this criticism, it would be prudent to first put McDowell's ethical project in metaphilosophical context. McDowell is a proponent of "therapeutic philosophy."  He says he is influenced by two main sources: the "Socratic tradition" and Wittgenstein.[@mcdowell1998mindvalue, preface] From the Socratic tradition he draws a way of thinking in which dualisms do not even arise. And from the later Wittgenstein he draws a way of doing "therapeutic" philosophy[@mcdowell2008critics] -- philosophy that ‘leaves everything as it is’^[Wittgenstein, *Philosophical Investigations.* Section 124.]. That is, McDowell believes many philosophical puzzles arise not from puzzling reality but from errors in *our own thinking*, so we need "therapy": dualisms need to be *exorcised*. He is an "anti-anti-realist." He is always fighting on two fronts, attacking a position without thereby supporting its apparent opposite. 

For example, consider his philosophy of mind. In *Mind and World* he attempts to dissolve the "vacillation" between naive empirical realism and "Rampant Platonism" (i.e., non-naturalism) by arguing that even primary qualities are not given to us in experience without the involvement of spontaneous conceptual capacities. He wants to accept the modern scientific picture of nature as "bald nature", a mechanical "realm of law", disenchanted from values, teloi, and other esoterica. But he does not want to accept that human rationality is likewise mechanical. Instead, he argues that humanity exists in a space of reasons where we recognize reasons for belief and reasons for action. 

McDowell here invokes Aristotle’s notion of ethics, by which he hopes to rethink our conception of human nature and nature as a whole. He says, “the rethinking requires a different conception of actualizations of our nature.”[@mcdowell1996mind 77] Second nature is that space in which human beings are initiated into particular ways of behaving and knowing by *Bildung* — that is, by education, formation, or cultivation.^[Bildung=formation, education; bild=form, image.] Practical wisdom is one example of a virtue that the young human being does not have but that may be developed by formation. At first, the ethical demands of practical wisdom are not even perceptible to the young. They have the natural potential to become aware of, and answerable to, the demands of practical wisdom. Slowly, that potential is actualized or inculcated and a moral outlook is attained. Human beings are initiated into this stretch of the space of reasons by ethical upbringing (Bildung) which instills the appropriate shape in their lives. 

So initiated, practically wise behavior is not just a new kind of behavior but the maturation and development of a new kind of faculty in the human animal. That moral outlook may be later examined, but only from within the moral outlook.  The circularity of this inculcation and new second natural faculty is not accidental: Since practical wisdom is responsive to reasons, it becomes a prototype “for the…faculty that enables us to recognize and create ... intelligibility.”[@mcdowell1996mind 79] "[The ethical demands of reason] are essentially within reach of human beings. So practical wisdom is second nature to its possessors.”[@mcdowell1996mind 84] In this sense, mature human being can be rightly described as "doing what comes naturally" when he or she engages in certain rational activities that have been deeply habituated. 

McDowell's positions in *Mind and World* illuminate his ethical project. McDowell's anti-dualist position is liable to puzzle and even frustrate some philosophers.[@mcdowell2008critics] In both his epistemological and his ethical theories, he denies *both* realism *and* anti-realism. Nevertheless, his position is comprehensible. Indeed, We should expect that he would dispute Foot's brand of moral realism as dangerously close to bald naturalism while also disputing its apparent opposite, pure subjectivism. 

Let us return McDowell's view of the relation between practical reason and nature.  We should recall part of the quotation from chapter 1 that explains McDowell's objection to Foot's organic naturalism. He says:

>I doubt whether we can understand a positive naturalism in the right way without first rectifying a constriction that the concept of nature is liable to undergo in our thinking. Without such preliminaries, what we make of ethical naturalism will not be the radical and satisfying alternative to Mrs Foot’s targets that naturalism can be. Mrs Foot’s writings do not pay much attention to the concept of nature in its own right, and this leaves a risk that her naturalism may seem to belong to this less satisfying variety.[@mcdowell1998mindvalue 167]

McDowell makes clear that his dispute with Foot concerns "concept of nature." Here, as above, McDowell invokes Aristotle’s notion of ethics as actualizing human nature by growing into second nature. McDowell accepts that human reasoning is irreducibly normative, but he does not accept the designation of such reasoning as "unnatural" or "non-natural." Instead, his "different conception" promises to show how such reasoning is an actualization of our primary nature.

How does he accommodate value within his picture of second nature? For McDowell, first nature consists of Lockean primary qualities, which are response-independent as well as dispositional properties which are response-dependent. "Values" are the latter sort. There is no such thing as "to-be-pursuedness" existing as a Lockean primary quality in first nature.  Whereas Foot thinks that normative facts are response-independent features of (first) nature, McDowell finds this view impossible to entertain. He says that naive realism about value is "impossible -- at least on reflection -- to take seriously..."[@shafer2007foundations 137] 

McDowell's skepticism of Footian realism is about "how something that is brutely *there* could nevertheless stand in an internal relation to some exercise of human sensibility."[@shafer2007foundations  143]  In considering the notion of intrinsically normative natural facts impossible to take serious, McDowell agrees with Mackie: the "central doctrine of European moral philosophy" is a mistake;[@mackie] it is wrong to think that some things *merit* certain responses by virtue of what they are and what we are. 

Furthermore, he thinks that treating "objective values" or normative facts as primary qualities of nature has been discredited or outmoded by modern science.^[The term 'objective value' is unfortunately common. I do not think it expresses the notion charitably. A better way of phrasing it would be to ask whether there is any reason to do anything at all. Put this way, it is more clear that every sufficiently matured human organism naturally has reasons to do some things, to pursue some ends, and reasons not to do some things, to avoid other ends.] He says, "The most striking occurrence in the history of thought between Aristotle and ourselves is the rise of modern science."[@mcdowell1998two 174] Although Aristotle provides the right cues, the modern scientific picture of nature is "disenchanted" from intrinsic moral values or human norms. 

A reader unfamiliar with McDowell's metaphilosophical project might assume that if norms are not real features of nature that they are purely subjective. Subjectivists such as Mackie, Alan Gibbard, and Simon Blackburn believe that normativity is "projected" by philosophers and scientists onto the natural facts. I hope I have explained well enough why McDowell resists this move. He grants that Mackie's error theory captures the common sense view that "ordinary evaluative thought [is] a matter of sensitivity to aspects of the world."[@shafer2007foundations 137] For secondary qualities cannot be adequately conceived "except in terms of certain subjective states."[@shafer2007foundations  139] Color-properties must be defined partly by their "objective" or response-independent aspects and partly phenomenologically. It makes no sense to speak of what *redness is* apart from perceptions of red *in perceivers*. Similarly, he argues, it makes no sense to speak of "dangerousness" apart from a subject who is potentially vulnerable. So, perhaps, it also makes no sense to speak of "rightness" apart from a subject who potentially judges the value of a thing. 

It does not necessarily follow that they are therefore illusory. A secondary quality is not "a mere figment of the subjective state that purports to be an experience of it."[@shafer2007foundations  139] The property of "being such as to look red" may or may not *have ever been perceived as red* by any observer (if, for example, the appropriate conditions have never obtained). So a Lockean secondary quality may be response-independent in some sense, but it is not *redness as such*. It is the dispositional property that is disposed to present us with an appearance of a particular phenomenal character. So values (like colors) are dispositional properties. 

In the same way, goodness, badness, and other values are therefore grounded in "second nature."[@mcdowell1998two 188 and following.]  The space of reasons in which our rational capacities operate makes us sensible to those dispositional properties of primary nature which become, for us, values such as goodness and badness.  And, as we saw in chapter 5, he thinks that the normativity of theoretical and practicall reasoning is merely grounded in our shared form of life. In *Mind and World*, he expresses his view by saying that human beings partially re-enchant nature.

This view is, I think, ingenious, but it is vulnerable to a couple of criticisms. 


## Restricted and Unrestricted Nature

Some have objected to McDowell's view of mind and world as being insufficiently naturalistic. James Lenman says, in a footnote: "McDowell is certainly pervasively inspired by Aristotle and he describes himself as a naturalist. See especially his 1995. But I suspect many philosophers would find his use of the term  'naturalist' here somewhat Pickwickian."[@sepmoralnaturalism.] I think McDowell's alternative to "strict naturalism" is indeed flawed, but not along those lines. As I shall show below, his form of quasi-idealism can indeed be rightly described as naturalistic. Rather, the flaw is both affirming and denying bald naturalism.

@fink expertly exposes McDowell's move here. To see the dilemma McDowell faces, consider that there are at least two kinds of conceptions of nature: (1) "Restricted nature" picks out some subset of all things that are natural, exclusive of anything 'non-natural', unnatural, or supernatural. There are various ways of picking out that subset. (2) The alternative is "unrestricted nature" which leaves nothing out. He explains the unrestricted conception in this way: 

>It would express the idea that there is one world only, and that that world is the realm of nature, which is taken to include the cultural, artificial, mental, abstract and whatever else there may prove to be. There are no realms above or beyond nature. To be is to be in nature and to be in continuity with everything else in nature. Even the greatest and deepest differences are differences within nature rather than differences between nature and something else.[@fink 206]

The question for McDowell is whether nature is best understood as some subset of reality or reality itself. Some readers may will insist that must simply stipulate our meaning and move on.  Fink disagrees:
 
>This is a terminological issue, but it is not easy to resolve simply by choosing one’s definition of ‘nature’ and then sticking to it. No account of naturalism should forget the fact that ‘nature’ is, as Raymond Williams puts it, ‘perhaps the most complex word in the language’ (Williams 1981: 184), or as Hume puts it, a word ‘than which there is none more ambiguous and equivocal’ (THN: III.I.II.)...Indeed, it is a deep root of ambiguity that we can talk about the nature of art, law, language, culture, morality, normativity, history, civilization, spirit, mind, God, or nothingness even if we otherwise regard these as non-natural, that is, as not belonging to nature as a realm. There is no contradiction in talking about the nature of the unnatural, the super-natural, or the non-natural, just as it is an open question what the nature of the natural is.[@fink 206]

Unrestricted naturalism is ecumenical. Restricted naturalism is parsimonious. Unrestricted naturalism is simple.  Restricted naturalisms are legion. For example, Fink lists eight different conceptions by which one can distinguish the natural from the non-natural: by 'nature' could mean the world unaffected by intelligent intervention (e.g., the arrangement of trees in the Yukon is natural where the rows of trees in the Huntington Library is not) or "the empirical world as opposed to the intelligible world of the abstract, logical, or mathematical" (natural sciences of physics and biology are natural where formal sciences such as calculus and geometry are not).  

With this in mind, we can assert a surprising truth. Both idealism and empiricism are forms of restricted naturalism. This may sound outrageous, but the case is sound. 

To begin, Fink discusses a passage from Plato's *Laws*. There, Plato draws a trichotomy between three kinds of events that come about by nature (*physis*), by chance, and by art. 'Nature' and 'chance' explain why plants grow, why the sun moves, and so on. 'Art' explains why houses have roofs, why humans wear clothes, and anything else that we do and that nature and chance could *not* have done. The "natural" pair in this trichotomy consists of the first two: that which comes about, so to speak, on its own, *prior to* and *independent of* intelligent intervention from humans or gods. This conception of nature excludes not only the supernatural but also the cultural, the fictional or imaginative, and so on. The Athenian does not accept this "dangerous" conception of nature. Rather, he argues that "soul is necessarily prior in origin to things which belong to body, seeing that soul is older than body."[@plato, *Laws* 891cff] Fink comments on this passage: 

>The Athenian doesn't just leave the concept physis to the ‘men of science’. He does not first accept their conception of nature and then confront them with the claim that there is something extra-natural—the soul or the gods— which they have disregarded and which is in fact prior to nature. No. Like McDowell the Athenian is eager to have nature on his side. He therefore challenges the scientists' right to restrict the term ‘nature’ to the soulless, partly necessary and partly accidental combinations of the elements. 

It is highly interesting that the Athenian stranger rejects this definition of nature.  He tries to prove that soul is "older than" and prior to body -- by first defining 'soul' as self-movement, and the cause of motion in other things. Regardless of the merits of the Athenian's argument, Fink explains that both sides are grabbing for the rights to the conception of nature. He says: "This, I take it, is pretty rampant Platonism but clearly presented as an account of the soul as natural because primary in existence... mind is prior to world."[@fink 215] If soul is the primary sense of nature, then body is "second nature." Mind is the primary thing, the first thing, the paradigmatic thing, against which mere body is contrasted. 

As Fink points out, Aristotle confirms that the issue between materialists and idealists is a disagreement about nature. Aristotle says: "Some identify the nature or substance of a natural object with the immediate constituent... e.g., wood is the 'nature' of the bed... [others] that 'nature' is the shape or form."[@fink 216, quoting from @aristotle *Physics*: 2, 1 (192b7ff)] Fink's comment is:

>Like in Plato, we find here both a definition of the word ‘nature’ (an inner source or cause of being moved and being at rest) and two competing conceptions of what that source is, namely matter and form (the material and the formal cause in Aristotle’s sense). Aristotle himself finds it most satisfying to regard the formal (and the teleological or final) cause as the nature of x.[@fink 216]

We can now see the crucial point about a term like 'naturalism.' Whatever one claims is the "inner source or cause" of a thing, the immediate constituent matter or the shape, one can be a 'naturalist.' Each account lays claim to the title 'naturalism', and impugns its rival as 'non-naturalistic'.

"Classical materialism" is one paradigmatic form of 'naturalism.'[@sellars1927naturalism]  By Fink's lights, classical materialism is a form of restricted naturalism for it affirms that whatever is material is part of nature, and so that the label 'not-natural' applies to whatever is not material (or not obviously material, such as ghosts, souls, and fairies). But the idealist, too, can rightly lay claim to the title of naturalism -- and not in a "Pickwickian" sense. Idealism and materialism turn out to be *identical* in one respect: they offer a "restricted conception of nature" and relegate to a "secondary" status everything that is not "natural" in the privileged sense. 

It is obvious that idealism and materialism are in competition, but Fink's insight is that they are competing for the same prize: the copyright on what will be given as the *first* and *natural* side. The temptation is overwhelming, on both sides, to presume their own view and hence to accuse the other side 'non-naturalism.' For example, some restricted naturalists beg the question by defining nature as material, spatio-temporal, causal system studied by (natural) science. The materialist presumption is what McDowell calls "philistine scientism."[@mcdowell1979virtue 346] Fink says, "McDowell has convincingly shown that what Bernard Williams calls the absolute conception of reality is merely restricted, bald naturalism ideologically presented as absolute (MVR: 112–31, esp. sect. 5)." [@fink 219] Wilfred Sellars provides a pure specimen of such question-begging:  "I mean that naturalism takes nature in a definite way as identical with reality, as self-sufficient and as the whole of reality. And by nature is meant the space-time-causal system which is studied by science and in which our lives are passed."[@sellars1927naturalism 217] Note that the first sentence explicitly endorses an unrestricted conception of nature while the next sentence secretly slides the ball into the other cup, overtly stipulating that the "space-time-causal system which is studied by science and in which our lives are passed" is "identical with reality." Whether that stipulation is true is the very question at hand. No one disputes that unrestricted nature is all there is; but some do dispute the implicit assumption that the space-time-causal-system is all there is. The question  cannot be settled by presumption.  

Other restricted naturalists beg the question by defining nature as the formal, immaterial, ideal world. My point here is not to endorse one or the other view; my point is that the unrestricted conception has the advantage that it does not try, in advance, to stipulate what is natural. As Fink puts it, "Nothing less than a naturalism that deserves to be presented as absolute could help break the spell of bald naturalism without merely replacing one restricted sort of naturalism with another and thus keeping the oscillations going."[@fink 219] Culture, art, rationality, intelligent intervention, and so on are part of the all. Fink quotes John Dewey: 

>Mountain peaks do not float unsupported; they do not even just rest upon the earth. They *are* the earth in one of its manifest operations. It is the business of those who are concerned with the theory of the earth, geographers and geologists, to make this fact evident, in its various implications. The theorist who would deal philosophically with fine art has a like task to accomplish. (Dewey 1958: 3–4, italics in original)

Fink's comment on Dewey's passage is this:

>On this conception the aesthetical (and the ethical) are not independent of nature, but they are not somehow based on nature or supervening on it either; rather, they simply are nature in some of its manifest operations. To think otherwise is both to mystify the aesthetical (and ethical) and to trivialize nature. The man-made, the artificial, the cultural, the historical, the ethical, the normative, the mental, the logical, the abstract, the mysterious, the extraordinary, are all examples of ways of being natural rather than examples of ways of being non-natural. Nature is never *mere* nature. That which is *more* than *mere* is nature, too.[@fink 217]

Where the materialist and idealist are fighting over the definition of primary nature, the unrestricted conception refuses to fight. Instead, it embraces both body and mind, brain and consciousness, matter and form, as existing on a single continuum. That continuum is, ex hypothesis, neither merely material nor merely formal, neither merely mental nor merely physical.  Unrestricted naturalism has this great attraction: that one can bow out of the materialist/idealist struggle over the conception of nature. The unrestricted conception has the disadvantage of being tautologous: one can no longer use the accusation of "non-naturalism" as a weapon against one's opponents.   While such triumphant rhetoric makes sense within bald naturalism, it will not do when we have expanded our conceptions of nature and science to mean all of knowledge about all that is real. It makes no sense to criticize opponents for positing something real "over and above" nature when we have defined "natural" as "real" and hence "non-natural" as unreal by definition.

To return to McDowell, we can ask whether McDowell's social naturalism  should be seen as a particular picture of restricted nature or as unrestricted? In truth, he tries to have it both ways, and the result is incoherence. On one hand, McDowell rejects the restricted conceptions of nature offered him by the bald naturalism "philistine scientism". He wants to make space for the practical point of view in the scientific worldview. On the other hand, he also explicitly rejects the restricted naturalism of Kantian idealism.^[Cf. @mcdowell1996mind.] Therefore, it seems he has chosen the unrestricted definition of nature by default.  Instead of explicitly admitting that he embraces the unrestricted conception without qualification, he puts the ball in one cup and then moves it around to the other side, pretending the ball was in the other cup all along. He keeps his conception of nature restricted (anti-supernatural) while *calling* in unrestricted (neither idealist nor physicalist). Like the materialist, he still wants to wield "non-naturalism" as a rhetorical weapon against some; but like the idealist, he wants to wield "philistine scientism" as a rhetorical weapon against others. McDowell claims to deny dualism by employing an unrestricted conception of nature while fully endorsing a restricted conception of nature. The McDowellian picture nature is both restricted and unrestricted. 

My view is that organic and humans norms are part of the natural order. It is clear that, on unrestricted naturalism, this view poses no problems. What about restricted naturalism? And I have argued in chapter 2 that even on some restricted forms of naturalism, the best evidence from biology suggests that there are such things as natural norms. We cannot build a scientific account of any organism without them.


## Two More Flaws 

Another flaw in McDowell's account is that he affirms robust realism about natural danger in a way that is inconsistent with his denial of robust realism about natural goodness. In the same essay, he presents a somewhat playful "theory of danger."[@shafer2007foundations  142-3] His theory of danger is that there is something about predators, say, that is really dangerous to their prey. The immanent presence of a bear does not just cause fear in a rabbit but *merits* it. To describe a bear as dangerous to rabbits is to assert something about both bears, about rabbits, and about their place in the animal kingdom on our planet. The rabbit does not need to use concepts or make rational judgments to see the bear as dangerous; it merely needs its natural perceptual capacities and its instincts. When a prey observes a predator, it feels fear; but the fear-response is not obviously reducible to a perception of some purely descriptive property, such as the bear's fur (other non-predators have fur) or its size (other non-predators are just as large or larger). Nor is the dangerousness projected by the rabbit onto the bear. Rather, the fear arises in response to the danger, or perhaps the bear-as-dangerous. Likewise, to describe a particular food as disgusting (say, rotten fruit) is to assert something about humans, about rotten fruit, and about the relation between the two. Given the kinds of beings we are, and given the natural properties of rotten food, the fact that we ought not to eat it seems to be a straightforward, natural normative fact. McDowell stated that he could not imagine how "something that is brutely *there* could nevertheless stand in an internal relation to some exercise of human sensibility." He does not seem to notice that his own example supplies a case.  The brute presence of a bear stands in an internal relation to the exercise of the rabbit's natural sensibility: it had better run. In humans, the brute fact that a friend is in need stands in an internal relation to the exercise of our natural, rational sensibility: it would be good to help. 

A final flaw in McDowell's account is that it falls prey to the very kind of dualism he explicitly aims to avoid. Namely, despite *calling* exercises of human practical reasoning (aimed at becoming virtuous and practically wise) "second nature", it is clear that he does not think such exercises do not belong to the (first) natural world, but only to humans. The result is a nature/human dualism. James Barham captures the dualism into which McDowell unwittingly falls: 

>...the philosophical literature tends to work with a scientifically outdated image of living things as rigid “machines.” This results in a picture in which only human beings (or at most the higher animals) can be properly ascribed purposes and agency in the full normative sense. From this perspective, we appear to be faced with an unappealing choice between eliminating teleology and normativity from our picture of nature altogether and understanding these phenomena as they are manifested in our own human form of life as floating free from any grounding in the natural world.[@barham 1]

I believe the same charge of dualism can be made against Rosalind Hursthouse's account of neo-Aristotelianism. Even though she draws heavily on Foot's work, she seems to vacillate between McDowell's and Foot's naturalisms when she says, "Ethical naturalism is not to be construed as the attempt to ground ethical evaluations in a scientific account of human nature."[@hursthouse1998virtue especially chapter 10] She claims that her account is, like McDowell's, still loosely naturalistic in that it is based on "human nature" or "second nature."  But then hasn't she thereby rejected Footian naturalism? Jennifer Frey also observes: 

>On this issue, Hursthouse seems to be speaking out of both sides of her mouth. She wants to acknowledge to Aristotelian critics like John McDowell that naturalistic considerations do not convince anyone to change their basic moral beliefs or motivate them to action. But at the same time, she thinks that she can approach the Humean or the Kantian and argue for “the rational credentials” of our moral beliefs based upon a “scientific” and “objective” naturalistic account. It is unclear how she is supposed to satisfy both parties at once, and the tension remains unresolved in her own work.^[Cf. @frey 44, footnote 55.]

McDowell and Hursthouse err in drawing the fundamental distinction between that part of nature that is rational (only human beings) and the rest of nature (everything but humans). Until this division is corrected, the desire for a unified account of human beings and the rest of nature will remain unfulfilled. 


## Solutions

My Footian alternative retains a distinction between human beings and the rest of nature but dissolves the dualism. The fundamental distinction to be made is not between rational and non-rational, but between living and non-living entities, where humankind shares with other living species a distinctive set of rational potentialities that constitute natural normativity. The attraction of this view is that it shows how the natural human norms inherent in human practical reasoning is of a piece with natural non-human norms of all organic life.  As Annas said above, "we find normativity in the realm of living things, plants and animals, already." The exercise of practical reasoning is part of the same natural order as our biological life form and function. That we practically reason *is* the natural fact that defines our life form and what we practically reason *about* are the the natural facts that already obtain for human beings. As Toner says: "the virtues are seen as acquired traits that fit human beings for the exercise of practical rationality toward which their shared nature directs them (thereby rejecting McDowell’s sharp separation of first and second natures)."[@toner2008sorts 243]  This view is more adequate because, as Toner explains: 

>The acquisition of the virtues not only prevents emotions from interfering with practical reasoning but also, in McDowellian terms, "opens our eyes" to new sorts of reasons for action, not visible to the immature, that make the good of others part of our good.[@toner2008sorts 243]

I endorsed McDowell's view, in chapter 5, that part of successful practical reasoning is the initial perceptual sensitivity to certain facts about what is required.  However, the facts to which the virtuous person becomes sensitive are not a sui generis set of "second natural" facts but the same natural facts that animals are sensitive to without reflection. By allowing normativity into our picture of nature at the organic level as a whole, human powers of theoretical and practical reasoning come to light as the *awareness* of that normativity, rather than its invention.  
For McDowell's nature/human dualism not only cuts human beings apart from the non-rational (organic) natural world, it cuts human beings down the middle. Human beings are also animals, with animal sensations and emotions. We might express the contrast by saying that McDowell presents human as *practical rational agents* full stop, where I presented humans as practical rational *primates*. I suggested in chapter 4 that this error leads him into the corresponding error of concluding that successful practical reasoning is virtue as a whole; by contrast, I argued that practical wisdom is a virtue of both practical reasoning, and other virtues (such as moderation) are virtues of rational practice.  

I briefly discussed the Irrelevance Problem above. McDowell sees natural norms as irrelevant to practical, rational norms because he endorses bald naturalism when it comes to natural, scientific reasoning but endorses social naturalism when it comes to ethical reasoning. This dualism makes the practical, normative dimension of nature appear detached from the theoretical, descriptive dimension, when they are more adequately understood as dimensions of one and the same world.  Jennifer Frey says: 

> ...the ethical naturalist must be able to show how ... these two seemingly different senses of good (the good we can derive from an account of what simply is and the good as practical goal) can be unified into one and the same account. That is, we need an account of natural normativity that will show us how the relation between a general judgment articulating some fact about a life form (a judgment about a fact that is potentially known from the outside) and a judgment concerning a particular bearer of that form in a particular situation, can take the form of a practical inference whose conclusion is an action that exemplifies that very same form of life.[@frey 65]

The Footian solution is to insist that the two forms of judgment are different ways of apprehending the same fact. The zoo keeper can apprehend the life form of a sloth bear only "externally"; and the sloth bear, not being endowed with logos, cannot apprehend its own life form internally. When it comes to human beings, we can apprehend both ways. For example, a rational alien who did not share our life form can only apprehend the life form (practical rational primates) externally just as scientists can apprehend our life form externally. But a rational human being can *also* apprehend the selfsame life form "internally" by reflecting on who and what we are. The facts do not change when we alternate between the two points of view. 

If both forms of knowledge grasp the same object, then the putative opposition between natural facts and practical reasons is dissolved. General judgments about a life form unite with practical inferences that are to be acted upon. 
Since practical reasoning *does* contribute to the process of deciding on a course of action, we can see how norms which are perceived as objective and external become recognized as relevant and binding. 

Despite McDowell's concession to bald naturalism that "the" modern scientific picture excludes the space of reasons, on my account, natural scientific reasoning is no less evaluative than any other expression of reasoning. Hence, "the scientific worldview" is capacious enough for natural norms, even on various restricted forms of naturalism. That is, scientific reasoning can be about *about* chemicals, quarks, mathematical models, biological life forms, or functions -- and more importantly, scientific reasoning includes both the external, descriptive point of view and the internal, normative point of view. The normative point of view simply is one of the scientific points of view. Natural, organic norms (including those of human beings) are part of the modern scientific worldview.  For human beings, scientific reasoning is natural reasoning; and practical reasoning is natural reasoning.


## Conclusion: Recursive Naturalism

This chapter laid out four requirements that neo-Aristotelian must meet and critiqued McDowell's own attempt to meet them. Taken recourse to a distinction between "first" and "second nature" does not explain but mystifies the place of human norms within the natural order. By contrast, the Footian alternative illuminates human norms as instances of natural norms obtaining in all organisms. If we take an unrestricted view of nature that absorbs the aesthetical, the ethical, the logical and so on, then it is merely tautologous to call it 'natural' when human beings engage in normative practical reasoning and reason about normativity. But even if we take a restricted view of nature to exclude some sorts of entities as non-natural, the kind of natural normativity that includes human practical reasoning should be included as natural. 

If I were pressed to coin a new term to describe my Footian organic naturalism, I would call it "recursive naturalism." Nature "recurs" within itself. Defining human beings practical rational primates entails that we are the one natural organism who reasons about natural organisms. We can observe the pattern of recursion in each element of the argument: Humans engage in natural reasoning about all sorts of things, including natural reasoning itself. We practically reason about practical reasoning. One of our (basic) natural functions is to discover (in greater detail) what our natural function is. Having a virtue (in part) enables us to become more virtuous. Being practically wise enables us to discern when and how to pursue more practical wisdom. Since human beings are natural organisms, and practical reasoning is natural to our life form, practical reasoning is natural reasoning.
