Neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics has offered a plausible meta-normative account of human nature and human virtue where virtues are 'natural goodness' for creatures like us. However, disagreement remains as to whether virtue is 'natural' in light of our unique rational capacities or simply in light of our biological nature. For example, Philippa Foot emphasizes the objective, biological aspects of human nature while John McDowell emphasizes the intersubjective, rational aspects. Julia Annas explains that the conversation has run aground of this difficult matter because it reflects a broader perennial question about the relationship between normativity and nature, or between ethics and science. 

My dissertation attempts to resolve this internecine dispute and thus render more plausible a normative virtue theory based on neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism. To this end, I systematically analyze a set of related concepts (nature, virtue, practical reason, and teleology) and defend the role of a naturalized teleology in normative ethics.

In brief, my thesis is that human beings *ought to become* practically wise because human beings are ‘practical, rational animals’. Practical wisdom (among the other virtues) defines our human life form *and* is the natural telos to be pursued.  I first argue that the natural organic or biological world includes natural normative facts about what is healthy, unhealthy, desirable, undesirable for organisms. Then, I apply the notion of natural norms to human organisms to uncover natural *human* norms. These human norms include normative facts about virtue and vice. I defend a conception of virtue according to which virtuous traits are rational practices and emotions, and practical reasoning is the process of identifying the good.

Hence, my thesis sits at the intersection of both normative virtue ethics and metaethics: it is normative in that it commends a life spent acquiring character and epistemic virtues even in the face of (inevitable) death and (the possibility of) human extinction; it also analyzes normative terms and concepts such as ‘ought’ and ‘naturally good’ and ‘human being’ to find a brute natural normativity consonant with scientific naturalism. On this view of virtue, the definitive criterion by which to judge human beings is our success or failure in acquiring virtues such as moderation and tolerance, and our overall success in the pursuit of the good life for humans. 
