# Chapter 6 Aug 23 

## Introduction

I have argued above that the human activity of practical reasoning is the defining trait of our biological species. If the last chapter was successful in providing an account of the intrinsically normative character of practical reasoning that defines mature human beings, the divide between organic and social naturalism reemerges with a vengeance. 

[^60]:  I am setting aside a third option: to go in for non-naturalism.

Resolving the problem two requires giving an account of the relation between nature and human practical reasoning. Organic naturalists such as Foot admit a fundamental distinction between living and non-living entities, where humankind shares with other living species a distinctive set of rational potentialities that constitute natural normativity.  The attraction of this view is that it shows how the natural human norms inherent in human practical reasoning is of a piece with natural non-human norms of all organic life. 

By contrast, social naturalists such as McDowell draw a similar fundamental distinction -- namely, between non-rational entities (even living organisms) and human beings, where humankind's distinctive rational potentialities are the root of all "second nature" natural normativity.[^60] McDowell objected that Foot's view is in danger of slipping into bald naturalism and philistine scientism. Is practical reasoning natural reasoning? If so, is it fundamentally "first" nature or "second"? 

This chapter offers a defense of Foot's picture of nature and a criticism of McDowell's. I shall not only summarize McDowell's view of the relation between reason and nature but also, because his paradoxical views have caused some consternation among his philosophical readers, offer an explanation of why his view is beguiling.  Even though there are several competing pictures of nature, I show how a neo-Aristotelian can accommodate natural norms within *either one* of the two. There is no consensus as to *the* neo-Aristotelian solution to these problems. Nevertheless, I shall build on recent work from Micah Lott, Hans Fink, and Christopher Toner to reveal what I believe is the most satisfying solution. 

Section 2 lays out Chris Toner's four requirements that a successful neo-Aristotelian naturalism must meet if it is to overcome the sort of criticizm McDowell poses. I show how my account has satisfied three of the four thus far.

Section 3 presents in detail McDowell's account of "first" and "second nature" and explains his ethical project in light of his broader metaphilosophical project. 

Section 4 argues that McDowell's account runs aground of Toner's fourth requirement. There are three flaws. First, I will show how McDowell plays a game of ball and cup with his account of 'the natural', affirming and denying a particular kind of natural/human dualism. Secondly, McDowell's account will be shown to depend on contradictory accounts of scientific inquiry. Thirdly, I will challenge his assumptions about restricting primary qualities to the non-normative. 

Section 4 presents my alternative solution. That solution consists of two interrelated claims about what nature is and how it can be known. My solution is compatible with both of the two most plausible competing pictures of nature and satisfies all the requirements that neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism should. 


## Four Requirements

A recent article by Chris Toner argues that neo-Aristotelians (such as Foot and Michael Thompson) have not yet adequately responded to McDowell's objections and satisfied four requirements "naturalism must deliver if it is to support a revived Aristotelian virtue ethics...”[@toner2008sorts 222] Gladly, our account thus far has satisfied three of the four. 

The first requirement is that, *natural norms must be intrinsically able to motivate the bearer of the nature.* The natural human norms pertaining to our nature are examples of practical reasons. And I have already presented an argument above that practical reasons are, by definition, able to motivate us. The process of practical reasoning (about practical reasons) is the process of adjudicating between various norms, desires, inclinations, urges, and so on. 






Secondly, Toner says, *natural norms must be intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of the nature.* Natural human norms must not be merely given; they must somehow justify themselves. Upon reflection must reveal that the norms are *good* practical reasons to all rational agents. The norms need not, Toner admits, *automatically* persuade a Callicles to repent of his wickedness. However, it must be *able to* become justifiable motivations under normal circumstances. He says: 

>...I say "intrinsically able to motivate or justify" rather than "intrinsically motivating or justifying": the natural norm is such that it can motivate or convince persons, provided they are not in too dysfunctional a state. In the same way a rose is such as to be intrinsically able to convince us of its being red. Its failure actually to do so in my case because I am color-blind or jaundiced does not impugn this intrinsic ability. Natural norms can motivate and convince because they are neither "mere facts" about the way a given species does go on nor "brute desires" a given species happens to have as a result of its evolutionary history.[@toner2008sorts 235]

It is true that mere general descriptive facts do not motivate and that simple brute desires to behave in a certain way are not necessarily overriding motivators. However, as I have argued in chapters 2 and 3, natural norms are not reducible to either mere facts or brute desires. Rather, natural norms both characterize what traits count as virtues for practical rational creatures like us, and are intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of that nature. Toner mentions that "The requirements of the virtues can be articulated into what Hursthouse calls v-rules (do what is just, what is courageous, and so forth)."[@toner2008sorts 242] I would articulate such norms or "v-rules" in the form of generics: human beings do what is just, what is wise, etc. The generic picks out what human beings naturally do; the failure to do so is, accordingly, a defect. Moral defects can be overwhelmingly common. Regardless of how statistically common the failure to conform to such norms, the discernment between virtuous and vicious is akin to the discernment between healthy specimens and unhealth ones, normal mother bears or pathological ones. 

Thirdly, *natural norms must be anchored in and express universal human nature.* In chapter 3 I defended a definition of "universal human nature," that we are practical rational primates. And I argued that the natural norm that one ought to become a fully mature practical rational primate (as represented by virtuous and wise exemplars) is successfully "anchored in" that nature.  More specifically, all the virtues of rational practice and practical reasoning are examples of such norms. For, as Toner says: 

>... the possession and exercise of the virtues is essential to human flourishing as dependent rational animals. Thus natural norms or the requirements of the virtues, in articulating what we need (to have, to be, to do) to flourish, are anchored in and express universal human nature.[@toner2008sorts 242] 

Fourthly, *first and second nature must be related so that the second is a natural outgrowth of the first, and so that that in our given makeup is (first) natural which does tend toward an ethically mature second nature.* This requirement expresses a desideratum which almost all self-described naturalists are committed to: the continuity of nature. Showing how McDowell's account falls short of meeting this fourth requirement, and offering and alternative account, is my aim here. 

## McDowell's First and Second Nature

McDowell aims to "formulate a conception of reason that is, in one sense, naturalistic: a formed state of practical reason is one's second nature, not something that dictates to one's nature from outside."[@mcdowell1998two] He does not wish to fall into a dualism between biology and rationality. We should note that he links the epistemological point with the metaphysical one: the dictates of practical reason come from "inside" one's rational point of view; yet reason is "naturalistic" in the sense that it expresses one's nature.

My objection to McDowell's view is that it oscillates between contradictory concepts of 'nature'. Recall the quotation in chapter 1 explaining McDowell's objection to Foot's organic naturalism. He says:

>I doubt whether we can understand a positive naturalism in the right way without first rectifying a constriction that the concept of nature is liable to undergo in our thinking. Without such preliminaries, what we make of ethical naturalism will not be the radical and satisfying alternative to Mrs Foot’s targets that naturalism can be. Mrs Foot’s writings do not pay much attention to the concept of nature in its own right, and this leaves a risk that her naturalism may seem to belong to this less satisfying variety.[@mcdowell1998mindvalue 167]

McDowell makes clear that his dispute with Foot concerns "concept of nature." McDowell invokes Aristotle’s notion of ethics, by which he hopes to rethink our conception of human nature and nature as a whole. He says, “the rethinking requires a different conception of actualizations of our nature.”[@mcdowell1996mind 77] Second nature is that space in which human beings are initiated into particularly rational ways of thinking and behaving. McDowell accepts that human reasoning is irreducibly normative, but he does not accept the designation of such reasoning as "unnatural" or "non-natural." Instead, his "different conception" promises to show how such reasoning is an actualization of our primary nature.

For McDowell, nature consists of Lockean primary qualities, which are response-independent as well as dispositional properties which are response-dependent. "Values" are the latter sort. There is no such thing as "to-be-pursuedness" existing as a Lockean primary quality in first nature.  Whereas Foot thinks that normative facts are response-independent features of (first) nature, McDowell finds this view impossible to entertain. He says that naive realism about value is "impossible -- at least on reflection -- to take seriously..."[@shafer2007foundations 137] 

The first reason McDowell can't take naive realism seriously is the impossibility of explaining "how something that is brutely *there* could nevertheless stand in an internal relation to some exercise of human sensibility."[@shafer2007foundations  143]  In considering the notion of intrinsically normative natural facts impossible to take serious, McDowell agrees with Mackie: the "central doctrine of European moral philosophy" is a mistake;[@mackie] it is wrong to think that some things *merit* certain responses by virtue of what they are and what we are. 

The second reason is that the doctrine of objective value, where normative facts are primary qualities of nature, has been discredited or outmoded by modern science.^[The term 'objective value' is unfortunately common. I do not think it expresses the notion charitably. A better way of phrasing it would be to ask whether there is any reason to do anything at all. Put this way, it is more clear that every sufficiently matured human organism naturally has reasons to do some things, to pursue some ends, and reasons not to do some things, to avoid other ends.] He says, "The most striking occurrence in the history of thought between Aristotle and ourselves is the rise of modern science."[@mcdowell1998two 174] The modern scientific picture of nature is "disenchanted" from such intrinsic values as meaning and morality. 

If McDowell is right that the modern scientific worldview prohibits believing that values are objective primary qualities, a natural move would be to embrace a form of error theory or expressivism or subjectivism. Subjectivists of the sort discussed above (such as Mackie, Alan Gibbard, and Simon Blackburn) believe that normativity is "projected" by philosophers and scientists onto the natural facts. But McDowell resists this move. He says that Mackie's error theory gets right the common sense view that "ordinary evaluative thought [is] a matter of sensitivity to aspects of the world."[@shafer2007foundations 137] Secondary qualities are "subjective" in that they cannot be adequately conceived "except in terms of certain subjective states"[@shafer2007foundations  139] but not in that they are therefore illusory. A secondary quality is not "a mere figment of the subjective state that purports to be an experience of it."[@shafer2007foundations  139] So what is the alternative to the apparently exhaustive dualism of seeing values (or norms) as *either* facts of nature like primary qualities *or* unreal, illusory, and purely subjective? 

His answer is that values are "secondary qualities" or "dispositional properties" of nature. In "Values and Secondary Qualities", he argues that values are like colors and unlike shapes.[@mcdowell2007values. I shall cite this anthology. The essay is also printed in @mcdowell1998mindvalue, chapter 7.] We might paraphrase this thesis by saying that natural norms are qualities *in the world* (not just in our heads) but they are not Lockean "primary qualities." They are, rather, Lockean secondary qualities.  A secondary property ascription is true "in virtue of the object's disposition to present a certain sort of perceptual appearance."[@shafer2007foundations  138] Experience of secondary qualities is a (sense) perceptual experience. Redness is not *merely* a microscopic texture property (say, the texture that scatters all light waves except red ones) because microscopic textures don't *look red* and things that *look red* appear so to observers with no knowledge of such textures. 

Colors are response-dependent, while other properties (say, squareness) are response-independent. Color-properties must be defined partly by their "objective" or response-independent aspects and partly phenomenologically. Shape-properties, by contrast, can be defined by their objective or mind-independent aspects. It makes no sense to speak of what *redness is* apart from perceptions of red *in perceivers*. Similarly, it makes no sense to speak of "dangerousness" apart from a subject who is potentially vulnerable. So, perhaps, it also makes no sense to speak of "rightness" apart from a subject who potentially judges the value of a thing. 

Yet by the same token right and wrong are not *purely* invented. The property of "being such as to look red" may or may not *have ever been perceived as red* by any observer (if, for example, the appropriate conditions have never obtained). So a Lockean secondary quality may be response-independent in some sense, but it is not *redness as such*. It is the dispositional property that is disposed to present us with an appearance of a particular phenomenal character. So values (like colors) are dispositional properties. 

Goodness, badness, and other values are therefore grounded in "second nature."[@mcdowell1998two 188 and following.]  The space of reasons in which our rational capacities operate makes us sensible to those dispositional properties of primary nature which become, for us, values such as goodness and badness.  And, as we saw in chapter 5, he thinks that  is merely grounded in our shared form of life, or our communal rationality. You might say that we partially re-enchant nature by bringing primary facts into the space of reasons.

### Discursus on McDowell's project

McDowell's anti-dualist position is liable to puzzle and even frustrate some philosophers.[@mcdowell2008critics] He denies *both* realism *and* anti-realism -- what else is there? To make his view here more comprehensible, it is advisable to briefly give some context on McDowell's metaphilosophy. 

McDowell is a proponent of "therapeutic philosophy."  He says he is influenced by two main sources: the "Socratic tradition" and Wittgenstein.[@mcdowell1998mindvalue, preface] From the Socratic tradition he draws a way of thinking in which dualisms do not even arise. And from the later Wittgenstein he draws a way of doing "therapeutic" philosophy[@mcdowell2008critics] -- philosophy that ‘leaves everything as it is’^[Wittgenstein, *Philosophical Investigations.* Section 124.]. That is, McDowell believes many philosophical puzzles arise not from puzzling reality but from errors in *our own thinking*, so we need "therapy": dualisms need to be *exorcised*. He is an "anti-anti-realist." He is always fighting on two fronts, attacking a position without thereby supporting its apparent opposite. 

With this in mind, we can more readily see how his objection to Foot and his quasi-subjectivist alternative is consistent with his solution to the mind-body problem. In *Mind and World* he attempts to dissolve the "vacillation" between naive empirical realism and "Rampant Platonism" by arguing that even primary qualities are not given to us in experience without the involvement of spontaneous conceptual capacities. He wants to accept the modern scientific picture of nature as "bald nature", a mechanical "realm of law", disenchanted from values, teloi, and other esoterica. But he does not want to accept that human rationality is likewise mechanical. Instead, he argues that humanity exists in a space of reasons where we recognize reasons for belief and reasons for action. 

McDowell here invokes Aristotle’s notion of ethics, by which he hopes to rethink our conception of human nature and nature as a whole. He says, “the rethinking requires a different conception of actualizations of our nature.”[@mcdowell1996mind 77] Second nature is that space in which human beings are initiated into particular ways of behaving and knowing by *Bildung* — that is, by education, formation, or cultivation.^[Bildung=formation, education; bild=form, image.] Practical wisdom is one example of a virtue that the young human being does not have but that may be developed by formation. At first, the ethical demands of practical wisdom are not even perceptible to the young. They have the natural potential to become aware of, and answerable to, the demands of practical wisdom. Slowly, that potential is actualized or inculcated and a moral outlook is attained. Human beings are initiated into this stretch of the space of reasons by ethical upbringing (Bildung) which instills the appropriate shape in their lives. 

So initiated, practically wise behavior is not just a new kind of behavior but the maturation and development of a new kind of faculty in the human animal. That moral outlook may be later examined, but only from within the moral outlook.  The circularity of this inculcation and new second natural faculty is not accidental: Since practical wisdom is responsive to reasons, it becomes a prototype “for the…faculty that enables us to recognize and create ... intelligibility.”[@mcdowell1996mind 79] "[The ethical demands of reason] are essentially within reach of human beings. So practical wisdom is second nature to its possessors.”[@mcdowell1996mind 84] In this sense, mature human being can be rightly described as "doing what comes naturally" when he or she engages in certain rational activities that have been deeply habituated. 

McDowell's view in *Mind and World*, I think, illuminates his discussion of secondary values or dispositional properties. And his position is comprehensible. Indeed, we should expect that he would dispute both Foot's brand of moral realism and also its apparent opposite, subjectivism and anti-realism. But it is vulnerable to a couple of criticisms. 

## Three Flaws

Some have objected to McDowell's view of mind and world as being insufficiently naturalistic. James Lenman says, in a footnote: "McDowell is certainly pervasively inspired by Aristotle and he describes himself as a naturalist. See especially his 1995. But I suspect many philosophers would find his use of the term  'naturalist' here somewhat Pickwickian."[@sepmoralnaturalism.] I think McDowell's ingenious alternative to "strict naturalism" is indeed flawed, but not along those lines. As I shall show below, his form of quasi-idealism can indeed be rightly described as naturalistic. Rather, the flaw is both affirming and denying bald naturalism.

@fink expertly exposes McDowell's move here. To see the dilemma McDowell faces, consider that there are at least two kinds of conceptions of nature: (1) "Restricted nature" picks out some subset of all things that are natural, exclusive of anything 'non-natural', unnatural, or supernatural. There are various ways of picking out that subset. (2) The alternative is "unrestricted nature" which leaves nothing out. He explains the unrestricted conception in this way: 

>It would express the idea that there is one world only, and that that world is the realm of nature, which is taken to include the cultural, artificial, mental, abstract and whatever else there may prove to be. There are no realms above or beyond nature. To be is to be in nature and to be in continuity with everything else in nature. Even the greatest and deepest differences are differences within nature rather than differences between nature and something else.[@fink 206]

The question for McDowell is whether nature is best understood as some subset of reality or reality itself. Some readers may will insist that must simply stipulate our meaning and move on.  Fink disagrees:
 
>This is a terminological issue, but it is not easy to resolve simply by choosing one’s definition of ‘nature’ and then sticking to it. No account of naturalism should forget the fact that ‘nature’ is, as Raymond Williams puts it, ‘perhaps the most complex word in the language’ (Williams 1981: 184), or as Hume puts it, a word ‘than which there is none more ambiguous and equivocal’ (THN: III.I.II.)...Indeed, it is a deep root of ambiguity that we can talk about the nature of art, law, language, culture, morality, normativity, history, civilization, spirit, mind, God, or nothingness even if we otherwise regard these as non-natural, that is, as not belonging to nature as a realm. There is no contradiction in talking about the nature of the unnatural, the super-natural, or the non-natural, just as it is an open question what the nature of the natural is.[@fink 206]

Unrestricted naturalism is ecumenical. Restricted naturalism is parsimonious. Unrestricted naturalism is simple.  Restricted naturalisms are legion. For example, Fink lists eight different conceptions by which one can distinguish the natural from the non-natural: by 'nature' could mean the world unaffected by intelligent intervention (e.g., the arrangement of trees in the Yukon is natural where the rows of trees in the Huntington Library is not) or "the empirical world as opposed to the intelligible world of the abstract, logical, or mathematical" (natural sciences of physics and biology are natural where formal sciences such as calculus and geometry are not).  

With this in mind, we can assert a surprising truth. Both idealism and empiricism are forms of restricted naturalism. This may sound outragous, but the case is sound. 

To begin, Fink discusses a passage from Plato's *Laws*. There, Plato draws a trichotomy between three kinds of events that come about by nature (*physis*), by chance, and by art. 'Nature' and 'chance' explain why plants grow, why the sun moves, and so on. 'Art' explains why houses have roofs, why humans wear clothes, and anything else that we do and that nature and chance could *not* have done. The "natural" pair in this trichotomy consists of the first two: that which comes about, so to speak, on its own, *prior to* and *independent of* intelligent intervention from humans or gods. This conception of nature excludes not only the supernatural but also the cultural, the fictional or imaginative, and so on. The Athenian does not accept this "dangerous" conception of nature. Rather, he argues that "soul is necessarily prior in origin to things which belong to body, seeing that soul is older than body."[@plato, *Laws* 891cff] Fink comments on this passage: 

>The Athenian doesn't just leave the concept physis to the ‘men of science’. He does not first accept their conception of nature and then confront them with the claim that there is something extra-natural—the soul or the gods— which they have disregarded and which is in fact prior to nature. No. Like McDowell the Athenian is eager to have nature on his side. He therefore challenges the scientists' right to restrict the term ‘nature’ to the soulless, partly necessary and partly accidental combinations of the elements. 

It is highly interesting that the Athenian stranger rejects this definition of nature.  He tries to prove that soul is "older than" and prior to body -- by first defining 'soul' as self-movement, and the cause of motion in other things. Regardless of the merits of the Athenian's argument, Fink explains that both sides are grabbing for the rights to the conception of nature. He says: "This, I take it, is pretty rampant Platonism but clearly presented as an account of the soul as natural because primary in existence... mind is prior to world."[@fink 215] If soul is the primary sense of nature, then body is "second nature." Mind is the primary thing, the first thing, the paradigmatic thing, against which mere body is contrasted. 

As Fink points out, Aristotle confirms that the issue between materialists and idealists is a disagreement about nature. Aristotle says: "Some identify the nature or substance of a natural object with the immediate constituent... e.g., wood is the 'nature' of the bed... [others] that 'nature' is the shape or form."[@fink 216, quoting from @aristotle *Physics*: 2, 1 (192b7ff)] Fink's comment is:

>Like in Plato, we find here both a definition of the word ‘nature’ (an inner source or cause of being moved and being at rest) and two competing conceptions of what that source is, namely matter and form (the material and the formal cause in Aristotle’s sense). Aristotle himself finds it most satisfying to regard the formal (and the teleological or final) cause as the nature of x.[@fink 216]

We can now see the crucial point about a term like 'naturalism.' Whatever one claims is the "inner source or cause" of a thing, the immediate constituent matter or the shape, one can be a 'naturalist.' Each account lays claim to the title 'naturalism', and impugns its rival as 'non-naturalistic'.

"Classical materialism" is one paradigmatic form of 'naturalism.'[@sellars1927naturalism]  By Fink's lights, classical materialism is a form of restricted naturalism for it affirms that whatever is material is part of nature, and so that the label 'not-natural' applies to whatever is not material (or not obviously material, such as ghosts, souls, and fairies). But the idealist, too, can rightly lay claim to the title of naturalism -- and not in a "Pickwickian" sense. Idealism and materialism turn out to be *identical* in one respect: they offer a "restricted conception of nature" and relegate to a "secondary" status everything that is not "natural" in the privileged sense. 

It is obvious that idealism and materialism are in competition, but Fink's insight is that they are competing for the same prize: the copyright on what will be given as the *first* and *natural* side. The temptation is overwhelming, on both sides, to presume their own view and hence to accuse the other side 'non-naturalism.' For example, some restricted naturalists beg the question by defining nature as material, spatio-temporal, causal system studied by (natural) science. The materialist presumption is what McDowell calls "philistine scientism."[@mcdowell1979virtue 346] Fink says, "McDowell has convincingly shown that what Bernard Williams calls the absolute conception of reality is merely restricted, bald naturalism ideologically presented as absolute (MVR: 112–31, esp. sect. 5)." [@fink 219] Wilfred Sellars provides a pure specimen of such question-begging:  "I mean that naturalism takes nature in a definite way as identical with reality, as self-sufficient and as the whole of reality. And by nature is meant the space-time-causal system which is studied by science and in which our lives are passed."[@sellars1927naturalism 217] Note that the first sentence explicitly endorses an unrestricted conception of nature while the next sentence secretly slides the ball into the other cup, overtly stipulating that the "space-time-causal system which is studied by science and in which our lives are passed" is "identical with reality." Whether that stipulation is true is the very question at hand. No one disputes that unrestricted nature is all there is; but some do dispute the implicit assumption that the space-time-causal-system is all there is. The question  cannot be settled by presumption.  

Other restricted naturalists beg the question by defining nature as the formal, immaterial, ideal world. My point here is not to endorse one or the other view; my point is that the unrestricted conception has the advantage that it does not try, in advance, to stipulate what is natural. As Fink puts it, "Nothing less than a naturalism that deserves to be presented as absolute could help break the spell of bald naturalism without merely replacing one restricted sort of naturalism with another and thus keeping the oscillations going."[@fink 219] Culture, art, rationality, intelligent intervention, and so on are part of the all. Fink quotes John Dewey: 

>Mountain peaks do not float unsupported; they do not even just rest upon the earth. They *are* the earth in one of its manifest operations. It is the business of those who are concerned with the theory of the earth, geographers and geologists, to make this fact evident, in its various implications. The theorist who would deal philosophically with fine art has a like task to accomplish. (Dewey 1958: 3–4, italics in original)

Fink's comment on Dewey's passage is this:

>On this conception the aesthetical (and the ethical) are not independent of nature, but they are not somehow based on nature or supervening on it either; rather, they simply are nature in some of its manifest operations. To think otherwise is both to mystify the aesthetical (and ethical) and to trivialize nature. The man- made, the artificial, the cultural, the historical, the ethical, the normative, the mental, the logical, the abstract, the mysterious, the extraordinary, are all examples of ways of being natural rather than examples of ways of being non- natural. Nature is never *mere* nature. That which is *more* than *mere* is nature, too.[@fink 217]

Where the materialist and idealist are fighting over the definition of primary nature, the unrestricted conception refuses to fight. Instead, it embraces both body and mind, brain and consciousness, matter and form, as existing on a single continuum. That continuum is, ex hypothesis, neither merely material nor merely formal, neither merely mental nor merely physical.  Unrestricted naturalism has this great attraction: that one can bow out of the materialist/idealist struggle over the conception of nature. The unrestricted conception has the disadvantage of being tautologous: one can no longer use the accusation of "non-naturalism" as a weapon against one's opponents.   While such triumphalist rhetoric makes sense within bald naturalism, it will not do when we have expanded our conceptions of nature and science to mean all of knowledge about all that is real. It makes no sense to criticize opponents for positing something real "over and above" nature when we have defined "natural" as "real" and hence "non-natural" as unreal by definition.

### Nature as Restricted 

To return to McDowell, we can ask whether McDowell's social naturalism  should be seen as a particular picture of restricted nature or as unrestricted? In truth, he tries to have it both ways, and the result is incoherence. On one hand, McDowell rejects the restricted conceptions of nature offered him by the bald naturalism "philistine scientism". He wants to make space for the practical point of view in the scientific worldview. On the other hand, he also explicitly rejects the restricted naturalism of Kantian idealism.^[Cf. @mcdowell1996mind.] Therefore, it seems he has chosen the unrestricted definition of nature by default.  

Instead of explicitly admitting that he embraces the unrestricted conception without qualification, he puts the ball in one cup and then moves it around to the other side, pretending the ball was in the other cup all along. He keeps his conception of nature restricted (anti-supernatural) while *calling* in unrestricted (neither idealist nor physicalist). Like the materialist, he still wants to wield "non-naturalism" as a rhetorical weapon against some; but like the idealist, he wants to wield "philistine scientism" as a rhetorical weapon against others. McDowell claims to deny dualism by employing an unrestricted conception of nature while fully endorsing a restricted conception of nature. The McDowellian picture nature is both restricted and unrestricted. 

### Practical Reasons as Primary Qualities

As we saw above, McDowell tries to accommodate values within nature as Lockean secondary qualities because the notion of practical reasons as primary qualities of nature was "impossible to take seriously." A second inconsistency in the account is that, by his own lights, some practical reasons are primary qualities. 

His examples are properties such as "danger" and "safe", which are identical in the relevant respects to the Footian notions of natural goodness and natural defect. He playfully presents an "epistemology of danger"  or a "theory of danger."[@shafer2007foundations  142-3] This moral epistemology helps explain why his view is not a variant of "projectivism."  

His theory of "danger" is this: Just as there is *something* about red things *themselves* that makes them give us redness experiences, likewise there is something about the dangerous animal itself that gives us fear experiences. That quality may not be *the form of red* or *the form of danger*, but it is also not *nothing.* The "theory of danger" is intended to capture this "something" with the important notion of *merit*. Red objects *just appear as red* to us under the proper circumstances. They *just do* dispose us to have red experiences. But dangerous objects *merit* appearing fearful and dangerous. They *merit* that we have a fear experience. To describe a bear (say) as "dangerous" to rabbits is to say something about bears and about rabbits in their context on planet earth. The rabbit need not engage in concept-use or perceptual judgment -- seeing the bear *as dangerous* -- rather the rabbit merely needs the instincts and perceptual capacities to see the bear. His response is not reducible to a response to the bear's size or fur or any other obvious empirical quality; the rabbit is simply responding to danger -- or perhaps it is responding to the bear-as-dangerous. Likewise, when we see certain kinds of food (say, rotten fruit) as "disgusting" we need not assume that we are projecting disgust onto the food; it is more plausible, by McDowell's own lights, that we are coming to discover an internal relation that certain kinds of decaying substances stand in to animals like us. This is McDowell's own example but he does not seem to notice that it can be used against his thesis. If "danger" is a Lockean primary quality, then "desirable" might be as well. Practical reasons for human beings include facts such as human natural norms and also relational facts obtaining. 

McDowell summarizes a common worry as to how "something that is brutely *there* could nevertheless stand in an internal relation to some exercise of human sensibility." But is this really so hard to imagine? For the rabbit, there is an internal relation between the simple fact of the presence of a wolf with sharp teeth and fast feet and an exercise of its sensibility: It had better run. 

He might object that his example doesn't commit him to as much as I am suggesting. The rabbit has a perception of danger and automatically reacts to it in service of its natural end of survival. Clearly, the rabbit does not reflect on its perception or reflect on possible courses of action, as humans do. But McDowell's use of the term 'merit' seems correct. The presence of a predator does not simply *cause* fleeing but *merits* fleeing. Something would be defective if a small prey ought to flee but doesn't. With humans, the pattern holds, even with the differences. When a human being perceives danger, *some* automatic impulses arise. Practical reason enables us to abide by or override these impulses. The ability to practically reason allows us to receive automatic impulses to act into the space of reasons as reasons to act, and hence as reasons that can be weighed against other reasons.  When a human being perceives some good as enabling one to learn some valuable information, say, the perceived good does not merely cause a motivation but constitutes a reason to learn it. 


### Science and Secondary qualities

A third flaw is that McDowell's conception of scientific inquiry is inconsistent. Call the two conceptions of science "restricted" and "unrestricted." Restricted science is what McDowell calls "philistine scientism", an overzealous attachment to the empirical methods of inquiry that ignores or denies the formal methods (logical, mathematically, computational, etc.). McDowell wants to denigrate one kind of scientific realism (say, realism about evaluative judgments of health and sickness) while endorsing another kind of scientific realism (about shapes, sizes, weights, and other primary qualities.) That is, he denigrates the desire to find goodness in (primary) nature as a kind of neurosis or anxiety arising from the philosophical vertigo we experience upon becoming inculcated with "the scientific worldview." 

 

## A Solution


McDowell shares with non-cognitivists an implicit nature/human dualism whereby human rationality (in the space of reasons) is entirely of a different order than organic and inorganic nature (in the realm of law). The alternative dissolves this dualism. Toner says: "the virtues are seen as acquired traits that fit human beings for the exercise of practical rationality toward which their shared nature directs them (thereby rejecting McDowell’s sharp separation of first and second natures)."[@toner2008sorts 243]  This view is more adequate because, as Toner explains: 

>The acquisition of the virtues not only prevents emotions from interfering with practical reasoning but also, in McDowellian terms, "opens our eyes" to new sorts of reasons for action, not visible to the immature, that make the good of others part of our good. So...MacIntyre links first and second natures much more closely than does McDowell.[@toner2008sorts 243]

Human beings are *animals* after all, with animal sensations and emotions and urges, the "sharp separation" between biology and rationality not only cuts humans apart from the rest of the cosmos, but cuts human beings down the middle. McDowell's concept of human nature denies that we are practical rational *primates*; his unwitting concept of human nature is we are *practical reasoners* full stop. I suggested in chapter 4 that this error infects his definition of virtue as well. He believes that all virtues pertain to practical reasoning (or "sensitivity") where I argued that some virtues pertaining to practical *reasoning* while others pertain to rational *practice.* 


James Barham captures the dualism into which McDowell unwittingly falls: 

>...the philosophical literature tends to work with a scientifically outdated image of living things as rigid “machines.” This results in a picture in which only human beings (or at most the higher animals) can be properly ascribed purposes and agency in the full normative sense. From this perspective, we appear to be faced with an unappealing choice between eliminating teleology and normativity from our picture of nature altogether and understanding these phenomena as they are manifested in our own human form of life as floating free from any grounding in the natural world.[@barham 1]

Neither of these unappealing choices should be taken. Rather, we should take Foot's lead in allowing normativity into our picture of nature at the organic level as a whole, with human beings included as natural organisms, including our full powers of theoretical and practical reasoning. 

I would suggest that the scientific worldview is capacious, including the best deliverances of our best sciences, including both material sciences (physics, biology) and formal sciences (mathematics, logic). It is hard to be asked to reject scientific knowledge from biology on behalf of  knowledge from physics. One suspects that John Dupre is right when he argues that the real request is that we reject genuinely scientific hypothesis from biology on behalf of a philosophical commitment to bald naturalism.[@dupre2004miracle] Just because such materialistic naturalism "dresses itself in the mantle of science" does not mean that a restricted conception of science can enjoy, undisputed, trademark on the concept. 

I should like to call my view Recursive Naturalism. It is recursive in two ways: first, the normativity of human rationality is both an *instance* of nature and is *about* nature, including about itself. Second, the object of practical reason is both to discover *the thing to do* and, recursively, to become more practically reasonable. Practical reasoning, when successful, sifts between excellent and defective expressions of our life form and correctly judges the kind of person one ought to become. This form of ethical naturalism is satisfyingly adequate to the task.  It captures the normativity of ethical reasons and aligns these reasons with the facts of nature. 


## Irrelevance

The Irrelevance problem (hereafter "Irrelevance") has three aspects. The first states that even if there are such things as natural human norms, they are not *ethically* definitive guides for how we should live because practical reasoners can pick and choose which natural norms to follow. Jennifer Frey places this objection in context of the is-ought gap: "[Irrelevance] is a more sophisticated presentation of the so-called ‘naturalistic fallacy.’  But rather than crudely rejecting any move from ‘is’ to ‘ought’, it merely blocks the inference at one crucial juncture—the inference from the ‘is’ of the species, to the ‘ought’ that governs the rational will."[@frey 14]  

For McDowell, the 'is-ought' gap is a real problem insofar as biology seems irrelevant to particular moral obligation. McDowell concedes, if only hypothetically, the existence of the sort of natural norms posited by the organic naturalist. Each organism pursues its own species specific goods, such as food, shelter, comfort, survival, and reproduction. But when it comes to rational animals like us, such norms are not binding. As animals, people find themselves subject to hunger, thirst. These merely biological urges are morally neutral with respect to the question of whether I should eat or not. Morality impinges on me to eat certain things at certain times and in ways. (A vegetarian might feel an ethical obligation not to eat meat even if the look and smell of it is appetizing; a glutton might feel an ethical obligation not to snack between meals even if he or she feels intense craving.) His discussion of the "rational wolf" illustrates that, although a wolf is "supposed to" hunt in packs because that is a formal property of its nature, a wolf endowed with *logos* would be just as free as human beings are to step back from such natural norms and either endorse or reject them. 

The organic naturalist's attempt to collapse genuinely normative obligations into natural norms seems to him a commitment to "philistine scientism". He would strenuously object to sentiments like that expressed by  E.O. Wilson: “the time has come for ethics to be removed temporarily from the hands of the philosophers and biologicized”.^[@wilson1975sociobiology 562] What McDowell thinks is needed instead is the kind of self-reflection discussed above. We must understand the good of human life, commit to pursuing it, and resist temptations to deviate from that pursuit. This self-reflective practical reasoning may not stay within the lines of orthodox "empiricism" but, McDowell would say, so much the worse for empiricism.




A second aspect to Irrelevance is what Elijah Millgram calls the "Pollyanna problem." This objection states that any honest, empirical assessment of human natural norms would include vicious norms as well as virtuous ones because justice and injustice are both statistically "normal."[^86] Anscombe anticipates this worry when she says: 

>The search for "norms" might lead someone to look for laws of nature, as if the universe were a legislator; but in the present day this is not likely to lead to good results: it might lead one to eat the weaker according to the laws of nature, but would hardly lead anyone nowadays to notions of justice.[@anscombe1958 14] 

[^86]: @andreou2006getting; @millgram2005reasonably; @woodcock2006philippa. 

It might seem that I was winking at the dark side of human nature when I built my inductive case for the generic that the human beings are practical rational primates. After all, politicians lie, sociopaths murder, businesses cheat, criminals steal, countries wage unjust war, parents abuse their children, and so on.  If we gather a robust sample of such behaviors and count them all as natural norms. Are we obligated to fulfill all such norms? Just some? Which ones? 

Empirically observing plants and non-human animals makes matters even worse: some acorns become fully grown, mature oaks, but other acorns become stultified, sickly specimens. Most acorns never become anything other than acorns before they disintegrate into dust in the soil. Some animals protect their young while other animals abandon or even consume their young. Are we supposed to allow, then, that "Human beings abandon their young" is a generic truth, indicative of the human life form? 




A third aspect we can call "Good Vices". Selfish traits such as cruelty and deception sometimes secure good outcomes for their possessors: the unjust person may "play a crucial role in human survival and reproduction."[@andreou2006getting 71] So some traits that are clearly vices from an ethical standpoint would turn out to be instances of natural goodness. After all, my presentation of human nature was supposed to provide an objective basis for showing how instances of natural goodness are virtues. If some putative vices are instances of natural goodness, then, absurdly, they too would be virtues. 

In Irrelevance, Pollyanna, and Good Vices, the norms putatively indicating what a virtuous human being is appear either irrelevant or positively vicious. We can only filter out vile norms by means of a prior evaluative judgment in favor of the sweet and sympathetic side of humanity. And where would this judgment come from? It would not come from an objective, scientific description but a normatively loaded  *ethical* judgment. So it would seem that the method of forming true ethical judgments is autonomous from the method of forming true descriptive, scientific judgments.

These objections together constitute pincer problem. On the one hand, the teleology of life (organic teleology) compels us to categorize injustice as a virtue or else to appeal to the practical, evaluative point of view; but the teleology of rational choice (social teleology) seems to force us to abandon the relevance of the teleology of life. Caught in this pincer, neo-Aristotelians must either bite the bullet and abandon organic naturalism, or embrace the absurd (or patently immoral) conclusion that some vices are good for us. Is there any way to escape the dilemma, or reconcile it? 

The attempt to reconcile the two forms of teleology can twist one into knots: Rosalind Hursthouse seems to vacillate between the two. She explicitly endorses Foot's naturalism (of first nature) but also seems to endorse McDowell's "naturalism of second nature." She says, "Ethical naturalism is not to be construed as the attempt to ground ethical evaluations in a scientific account of human nature."[@hursthouse1998virtue especially chapter 10] She claims that her account is, like McDowell's, still loosely naturalistic. She still  bases ethical considerations on our nature as rational agents, i.e., "human nature" or "second nature."  But then hasn't she thereby rejected Foot's view? Jennifer Frey also observes: 

>On this issue, Hursthouse seems to be speaking out of both sides of her mouth. She wants to acknowledge to Aristotelian critics like John McDowell that naturalistic considerations do not convince anyone to change their basic moral beliefs or motivate them to action. But at the same time, she thinks that she can approach the Humean or the Kantian and argue for “the rational credentials” of our moral beliefs based upon a “scientific” and “objective” naturalistic account. It is unclear how she is supposed to satisfy both parties at once, and the tension remains unresolved in her own work.^[Cf. @frey 44, footnote 55.]

Hursthouse's account attempts to make use of Foot's insight but runs into trouble when it tries to accommodate, at the same time, McDowell's picture of first nature as merely descriptive and bald. 

Frey puts the dilemma succinctly: "The problem our dilemma poses is how we can reconcile what on the surface appear to be quite different sorts of teleology: natural and practical."[@frey 63] 



## Solutions

Can my account overcome these objections? The solution, in brief, relies on the account of practical reason defended above. Frey provides a summary: 

> ...the ethical naturalist must be able to show how these two seemingly opposed teleologies (the natural teleology of life and the practical teleology of action) and these two seemingly different senses of good (the good we can derive from an account of what simply is and the good as practical goal) can be unified into one and the same account. That is, we need an account of natural normativity that will show us how the relation between a general judgment articulating some fact about a life form (a judgment about a fact that is potentially known from the outside) and a judgment concerning a particular bearer of that form in a particular situation, can take the form of a practical inference whose conclusion is an action that exemplifies that very same form of life.[@frey 65]

My account of practical reasoning shows us how general judgments about a life form unite with practical inferences that are to be acted upon. Practical reasoning allows us to apprehend one and the same identical object apprehended in two different ways. That is, our natural human life form as practical rational primates, including the natural norms binding on us, can be apprehended both "externally" by the alien anthropologist who does not bear that life form and "internally" by human beings who do bear that life form. 

If both forms of knowledge grasp the same object, then the putative opposition between natural facts and practical reasons is dissolved. Since practical reasoning does contribute to the process of deciding on a course of action, we can see how norms which are perceived as objective and external become recognized as relevant and binding. 

When we examine the behaviors of organisms, we make generalizations. As we sift through these generalizations, some remain mere generalizations about how some creatures happen to behave, while others are classified as essential or natural to how that creature behaves. The latter are natural norms. And this sifting process is one and them same, whether in scientific or ethical accounts. Indeed, part of having a properly-formed mind is that one distinguish between natural norms and mere generalizations.

For example, a sloth bear in Washington D.C. gave birth in captivity to three cubs. The first one was immediately killed and eaten by the mother, but the second were nurtured and cared for. The zookeepers were appalled, and when, after a week of caring for the remaining cubs, the mother killed and ate another, they intervened to save the third.^[Virginia Morell (2014, March 28).  "Why Do Animals Sometimes Kill Their Babies?". *National Geographic* (March 28, 2014). Accessed online. http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2014/03/140328-sloth-bear-zoo-infanticide-chimps-bonobos-animals/] This event posed the question: is something wrong with the mother bear? First, the zookeepers observe the facts: the mother ate one cub and nurtured (temporarily) the other two. The generalizations to be made of this observation are both that (1) a mother cares for her young, and (2) a mother sometimes kills her young. Secondly, they sift these norms to identify which is the natural norm.  University of Southern California primatologist Craig Stanford points out that the consensus among biologists is to affirm the generic truth: a mother cares for her young. As a normative generic, we can say without a change in meaning that a mother bear is *supposed* to care for her young, and that infanticide is pathological. New data can confirm or disconfirm this evaluative judgment. For instance, the third cub of the sloth bear whom the zookeepers intervened to save turned out to suffer an elevated white blood cell count. It is possible that the other cubs were sick as well. The zookeepers speculated that the mother somehow knew this and so killed the ailing cubs. If this were true, it would give rise to a new generic: a mother cares for her healthy young. If it turned out that the two other cubs were *not* in fact ailing, the mother's behavior would be classified as pathological.

Similarly for humans and other primates.^[@goodall1977infant] Psychologist Christine Lawson narrates how a mother drowned her two young children in order to ingratiate herself to a man she was dating who said, offhandedly, that he did not want children.^[@lawson2000understanding] Although her behavior was criminal, it was also pathological. Statistically, the vast majority of human mothers indeed care for their children adequately. We do not posit "mothers care for their children" as a mere statistical likelihood that admits of exceptions. Rather, psychologists correctly judge such exceptional cases of parental indifference and cruelty as normative errors. Parents are *supposed to* care for their young, even when doing so is difficult or costly. There is *good reason*to take care of one's child. To take a significant others' offhand comment about not wanting children *as a reason* to murder one's own is a devastating error in practical reasoning.  This particular mother was not merely a statistical anomaly but an example of a psychological disorder (in this case, Borderline Personality Disorder). 

I argued above that practical reasoning is not one of many ways of being motivated but is the very capacity to be motivated by reasons. Plants and animals are inclined or motivated to their good by instinct or irrational appetite. They cannot pause to reflect on whether they should follow through on the instinctual flight from predators or pursuit of food and shelter.  Humans are inclined by their good *both* by instinct (and emotion, desire, etc.) *and* by reason.  I also argued above that the object of human practical reasoning is a quite general conception of what is good. By 'good' we don't mean a non-natural property apprehended theoretically but the something intrinsically practical: the choice-worthy, the desirable, the to-be-pursued. As Frey clarifies:

>Although natural inclinations depend upon conceptual apprehension, we should not be tempted to think that they are objects of contemplation. These goods, as first principles of practical reason, are apprehended as ends—as objects of pursuit rather than as objects of contemplative knowledge.[@frey 88]


## Conclusion

My account argued that virtue is excellence in rational practice and practical reasoning.  Insofar as virtue is necessarily related to practical rationality, an account of practical reason was needed.  I argued that practical reasoning is the capacity for identifying and acting on practical reasons. As practical reasoners, we observe some facts as practical reasons. I briefly argued that some mundane natural facts are at the same time practical reasons. Just as speculative reason is by definition the faculty for judging true and false, practical reason by definition judges worth or its absence. A practical reason can and does motivate one, all by itself; in conjunction with or absent other immediate inclinations or desires. Practical reason, furthermore, motivates when one judges that a course of action or an outcome is good in itself, that it is *desirable* in the sense that it is to be desired whether one presently desires it or not. For human beings, practical reasoning is natural reasoning; for human beings, reasoning well is natural goodness. 