### New abstract

Philippa Foot's version of neo-Aristotelian virtue theory identifies ethical facts or properties such as virtue, vice, right, wrong, good, and bad with straightforwardly natural facts or properties of the human species. Foot's theory is classified as ethical naturalism. Foot's is not the only version of ethical naturalism, of course, but each locates ethical properties in "nature" somehow. As Jennifer Frey puts it: 

>The ethical naturalist’s master thought is this: man needs the virtues just as much as a bee needs its sting. Such a thought is intriguing insofar as it takes the ethereal and elusive ‘moral ought’ and brings it back down to earth, by locating it within a wider structure of evaluation we already readily grasp and acknowledge as objectively valid.[@frey]

Whether the natural facts or properties in which ethical facts are located is some conception of human biology, the human "life-form", "form of life", the human characteristic way of life, or something else, the common point is clear: human beings need these qualities *because of who and what they are*. 

Now, there is a major tension *within* ethical naturalism *between two sorts* of ethical naturalism. On the one hand, philosophers like John McDowell and Rosalind Hursthouse insist that such an ethical naturalism is not "scientific" in the sense that it cannot validate ethical norms from an "objective", external, third-person perspective. (McDowell even suggests that the desire for such an external validation is neurotic.) On the other hand, Philippa Foot and Michael Thompson insist that our ethical knowledge of what traits the human species *needs* to acquire (and which it needs to avoid) can and should be just as objective, scientific, and valid as our biological knowledge of what traits any other living species needs. 

The two sorts of ethical naturalism on either side of this fault line go by various names. Let's call the first sort "Excellence Naturalism" or the "Naturalism of Second Nature" and the second kind "Organic Naturalism" or the "Naturalism of Primary Nature." The lively discussion of this issue is more than a war of words or a browbeating by different stipulative definitions. These two sorts of naturalism mirror, within ethical and metaethical conversations, two sorts of naturalism more broadly. Non-reductive and reductive naturalism, "relaxed" and "strict" naturalism, naturalized platonism and naturalized Aristotelian. 

In this dissertation, I attempt to further the cause of the second sort -- Organic Naturalism. I argue that the so-called 'values' of goodness and badness are in some sense straightforward properties of nature, identical in genus to other properties which are conceptually essential to biological sciences (e.g., life, health, and defect). Better, these are not "values" at all and calling them values begs the question in favor of anti-realist forms of ethics (whether naturalistic or non-naturalistic). The moral laws that tell humans to be moderate rather than a glutton or a lush, to be tolerant rather than a bigot or mean-minded, to be practically wise rather than a fool -- are instances of a kind of natural norm identical in genus to other natural norms conceptually essential to many sciences (e.g., generic truth, natural kind, natural function, etc.) 

The major objection to Organic Naturalism is the variously named "is-ought gap". That is, the objection assumes that nature is a "bald" spatio-temporal manifold of descriptive facts with no values whatsoever and that normativity is an abstract "space of reasons" and norms and values, and then places all normativity within humans. This objection draws a 'nature-human gap' and places all normativity on the human. 

The rebuttal to this objection is simply to deny the assumption: Nature is already both a normative and descriptive space. This can be shown by demonstrating that nature consists at least partly of natural teleological facts and laws, and that teleology is genuinely normative. 

If nature is normative and descriptive, both rational and material, then there is no 'nature-human gap'. Humans are just as natural as mountains, supernovae, bacteria, and the great American condor. Since nature is itself a normative "space of reasons" as well as a spatio-temporal manifold, then if humans are fully natural, they must in a space of reasons and can be responsive to them. In this way, although ethics is certainly a more rational than empirical disciplien, ethics is continuous with other natural and formal sciences such as biology, ethology, and logic. 

This argument is primarily metaethical. But to make good on my claim that genuinely *ethical* judgments can remain true to their genuinely *natural* foundations -- or rather, just are natural judgments -- I extend the argument to normative ethics in three respects: First, I offer naturalistic definitions of some classical and modern virtues such as moderation and tolerance and argue that they are *needed* by all human beings qua practical, rational animals. Second, I argue that practical wisdom is the obligatory virtue par excellence, the highest virtue and most needed quality for creatures like us. Third, I offer a tentative naturalistic account of human flourishing that is strictly agnostic about the endurance of consciousness after brain death and therefore is compatible with the view that humans will live on after death and the view that the human race will eventually go extinct. 

While these normative arguments are admittedly quick and deserve more attention to the empirical data, they demonstrate the *type* of normative arguments available to the ethical naturalist of the Footian sort. The goal is to open more widely an exciting space of dialogue between ethicists, social scientists studying cognitive psychology and social reasoning, and other biological scientists studying neuroscience, evolutionary biology, ethology, etc. This cross-pollination promises not only to make ethics more scientific but the sciences more ethical, as is already occurring in business ethics, bioethics, environmental ethics, and more. Naturally, there is good reason to accept that the acquisition of virtues is indeed normative. There is plenty of room for debate and discussion about which traits count as virtues and which cultural settings and social institutions are best at inculcating moral and intellectual virtues. Nevertheless, there is good reason -- good scientific and ethical reason -- to think that we as individuals and as a society ought to be pursuing the acquisition of more virtue, moderation, and practical wisdom. 


## Secular, Scientific, Naturalistic, Ethical?