

This dissertation inquires into the virtue ethics of recent neo-Aristotelians, especially Foot (2001), McDowell (1995), MacIntyre (1999). The ‘neo-Aristotelians’ are a group of contemporary (mostly analytic) philosophers that have offered answers to a set of ethical questions that, in my opinion, represent some of the most significant and interesting work being done in English speaking ethics. 

Most broadly construed, the group includes Anscombe,[@anscombe1958; @anscombe1957intention], Geach,[@geach1977virtues and 1956], Foot (2001), McDowell (1995), MacIntyre (1999), Hursthouse,[@hursthouse1999], Nussbaum[@nussbaum1995;  @nussbaum1988non and 1993] and Thompson (1995),  Annas,[@annas2011intelligent] and Brown[@brown2008].  While I have tried to pay heed to the contributions of each of these significant authors, for purposes of space I have limited my focus mostly to MacIntyre, Foot, and McDowell. The richness of their literature on common themes promises illuminating comparisons and contrasts. 

Sadly, 

### Virtue ethics, then and now

As far as ethical theories go, virtue ethics is perhaps the oldest philosophical school of thought in the west. Yet, it is also, perhaps surprisingly, young and new again. Today, virtue theories are not studied only for their historical interest, as archeologists study dry bones but as thirsty nomads study the sand in hopes of finding a viable watering hole. We moderns live in a time of moral dryness, and we cry out for drink. 

At the same time, modernity is not the ancient world. Modern science, philosophy, and culture are not the same as their ancient counterparts. If virtue ethics is a Phoenix rising from the ashes again, much has changed in this Phoenix nest. Is virtue talk obsolete? Is the revival of such talk antiquarian and nostalgic? Those of us allied with modern science, analytic philosophers especially, have an interest in knowing what conception of virtue is being presented for review as a potential theory to endorse. If virtues are excellences of human nature, metaphysical naturalists of various types have a right to know what conception of nature is being assumed. I don’t think virtue talk is any older than laughter or talk about food and the stars; all are as human in our ancestors as in us. But I do think it imperative that contemporary virtue ethicists pay due respect to what *has* changed. 

What are virtue ethicists discussing today? The revival of virtue ethics is reviving has given rise to a diversity of voices and lively controversies. The content of their work is a set of questions the nature of virtue: what is a virtue? Is virtue talk still relevant in our modern context? Is virtue ethics hidebound to traditionalism or religion? But their questions concern issues central to any reflective human life: what does it mean to live well? What (if anything) makes humans different from other animals? What (if anything) is our ultimate goal or purpose as individuals and as a species? 

Just as importantly, the form of their work is an older three-fold conception of ethics that, perhaps most recently, Alasdair MacIntyre has elucidated. An ethical system must contain three elements: a conception of human nature as it is currently, a conception of the telos or destination that can and should be realized, and some conception of which qualities or actions that proceeds from human nature to that telos. The three components are, quite simply, a starting point, an end, and means to that end. Without any of these components, he argued quite persuasively that a practical discipline like morality stultifies. Rules and virtues without an end are mere legalism; we can't imagine even going shopping with a list of groceries we "should" buy without a clear conception of the dinner to be cooked. MacIntyre's powerful critique of modern morality in *After Virtue* is that when it errs it errs in precisely this respect: it abandons telos. 

This three-fold form demands that the ethicist articulate a starting point, an ending point, and a means from the first to the second. The philosophers most responsive to that demand have been the neo-Aristotelians. 

Specifically, in this dissertation, I shall defend the thesis that virtues (especially practical wisdom) are the excellent character traits all human beings need, and that partly constitute the realization of our natural human telos.  

My thesis has three main parts: the notion that virtues are excellent character traits all humans need; the notion that all human beings especially need practical wisdom; the notion that such character traits partly (but not fully) constitute the realization of our natural human telos. I hope it is clear that the shape of my themes follows the three-fold form MacIntyre posits: virtue (the means to happiness), practical reason (where we start), and happiness (where we want to end up). Each part needs clarification, of course. I shall clarify, elaborate and defend them in chapters two through four. Each concept is examined, first and foremost, but analyzing and interpreting the recent neo-Aristotelians, especially Philippa Foot, John McDowell, and Alasdair MacIntyre. 

## Chapter Outline

At present, the defense of my thesis and exploration of my key authors takes the form of the following Chapters.

1. Neo-Aristotelian Ethical Naturalism
2. Virtue as Excellent Traits All Humans Need
3. Virtue as Excellence in Practical Reason
4. Virtue as Partly Constituting Happiness
[5. Virtue as Natural]
[6. Virtue as Divine]
7. Conclusion


The first chapter sets up the project. I examine the historical context, philosophical taxonomy, state some of my methodological strategies, and take care of other housekeeping items. 

It explains the recent rise of virtue ethics and the important place that neo-Aristotelian virtue ethicists have played in this rise. It defends virtue ethics as the most plausible ethical theory, despite its ongoing problems. It also defends a particular way of distinguishing ethics from metaethics and locates the author’s project in the current philosophical taxonomy: ethical naturalism, neo-Aristotelianism, which refers to (in short) the ambitious project of grounding real ethical facts in human nature, which is normative. 

The second chapter defends a general account of virtue against various problems that are commonly presented. 

1. What exactly *is* virtue (and its opposite, vice)? There are many accounts of virtue. Are they compatible or are there some that are more plausible? Are there any good answers to skeptical worries to the effect that there are no habitual characteristics or acquired traits such as virtues and vices are supposed to be.[@harman2009skepticism] Do virtues and vices qua stable character traits even exist? Or if they exist, do they matter enough to make theorizing about virtue even interesting?[@kamtekar2004situationism] Are virtues “necessary” for us? A traditional notion defines virtues as those traits by which one becomes *fully human* or actualizes human nature. Human nature is something like a set of properties or capacities common to all humans -- at least all non-defective humans. Talk of a fixed "human nature" implies that an agent's humanity is in one sense a *given* to be discovered, while in another sense it is a goal to be achieved. One of the most persistent and widespread objections to this conception of virtue is that it seems to depend on a discredited Aristotelian metaphysical picture of human nature. Furthermore, even if we could expound and defend a realistic concept of human nature, would basing ethical conclusions on metaphysical or psychological premises commit Moore’s so-called "naturalistic fallacy"? How do we proceed from a premise about *the way human nature is* to any specific normative conclusions such as *humans ought to keep their promises*?

      **Virtue**. This chapter will provide an primary ethical argument that the virtues are necessary for man as such (using man of course in its gender inclusive sense). By 'the virtues' I mean at least justice, courage, moderation, and practical wisdom -- but possibly more. And by 'necessary' I mean *necessary for* human flourishing. I shall define human flourishing more exactly in a later chapter; I mean to gesture at human well-being, true happiness, human success as such, etc. all of which I take to be virtually synonymous and all of which I will certainly treat here as synonymous. Put negatively, the thesis of this chapter is that vices necessarily contribute to misery, unhappiness, and human stultification and stagnation. Human nature is the starting point, flourishing is the goal, and the moral and intellectual virtues are the means by which we move from start to goal. The remaining chapters address objections to this primary thesis. 


2. What is the relation of virtue to practical reason? Human nature has been thought to include such essential properties as practical rationality, or rationality in general, language, social consciousness, self-consciousness, or genetic and other environmental/cultural properties.  Human nature is rational. Perhaps this explains why there is a growing body of literature on the theme of intellectual (rather than merely moral) virtues.[Cf. @zagzebski1996virtues;  @bloomfield2000virtue] Some think practical wisdom (or phronesis) is one virtue among many, while others think it the master virtue that unifies both practical and intellectual. Are all virtues practical or are some intellectual? 

      **Practical Reason**. This chapter defends one of the core assumptions of the case that virtues are necessary for man: namely, that there is such a thing as human nature. Man has a nature that is discernible; his nature is that of practical rational animals. Wisdom is, therefore, the supreme virtue necessary for human flourishing. Chapter 2 defends this thought against objections from Darwinism from metaphysical skepticism of a certain sort, that there is no human nature, or that if there is, that it is "a mess," or that I even if it's there is, we cannot know what it is. All of which if they were true would render impossible the kinds of moral judgments based on human nature. Chapter 2 also defends the form of naturalism that will be at stake here, namely one in which (in important ways) nature includes normativity, and normativity is natural. The specter of the naturalistic fallacy is flushed from its hiding place and exorcised.


3. What is the relation between virtue and happiness?  


      **Happiness.** This chapter defends a particular conception of happiness, which is, I argue, our human telos. Happiness is an indeterminate concept capable of including varying conflicting views but denoting whatever it is that is the natural *telos* of humans as such. The thesis that human nature even exists has already been argued. But it is a view of human nature that depends on, and supports, teleological realism about biology. I distinguish between destiny (which is inevitable and determined) and destination (which is not inevitable and not determined). Health, wealth, and reproduction are goals of most people in most places at most times. But Happiness with a capital "H" is the implicit destination of humanity as a species. A conception of happiness  both in this world definitely and potentially beyond this world. But if there is no beyond, the happiness does not even change. 

### Secondary themes: telos, practice, nature

The concepts of virtue, practical reason, and happiness are the primary focus of these inquiries. But my focus will extend to include other key concepts that these philosophers invoke in their account of virtue. 

*Practice* is a key secondary concept in MacIntyre because he defines virtues as “acquired human qualities that enable their possessor to achieve those goods which are internal to *practices*.”[@macintyre1984after, 191, emphasis added. *After Virtue* was published in 1981. Unless otherwise noted, the citations in this proposal refer to the 1984 second edition.]  To discuss MacIntyre's account of virtue it will be useful to discuss writings like those of Michael Thompson, who gives an account of life, action, and practice.[@thompson2008life] 

Another key secondary concept is that of a *human lifeform*, because Philippa Foot argues that virtues are necessary for creatures like us. She makes the analogy that, “virtues play a necessary part in the life of human beings as do stings in the life of bees”.[@foot2001natural 35] To discuss her account of virtue it will be useful to discuss the concept of what is “necessary for humans” in writings like those of Peter Geach, whose analogy she is paraphrasing. For example,  *human nature* is key for Foot (as for Rosalind Hursthouse), as is *second nature* for McDowell. More broadly, the concept of *nature* is an important secondary concept, for *naturalism* is a key appeal of recent neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics. 

Yet another theme is the loss of — and restoration of — teleology in morality. Alasdair MacIntyre was the first contemporary ethicist to articulate the full range of implications of such a loss for ethics, society, and politics. He also went a large way, in *After Virtue* and other works, to restoring a vision of morality with telos. This dissertation centers on recent neo-Aristotelians to see how telos makes a difference for virtue, practical reason, and happiness. 

            **Nature** This chapter coordinates the conclusions of the previous chapters, and sharpens the above-stated thesis.The main thesis having been outlined and defended, this chapter addresses remaining objections. As paradoxical as it may seem, I anticipate that the objections will be from two quarters: first, that my view is too "naturalistic", or not naturalistic enough for some readers; and second, that my view is to too secular, or not secular enough. I take each of these potential worries in turn. 

      First, I argue that 'naturalism' as it very often appears in our philosophical literature is virtually useless. My position will inevitably be characterized by some friends and foes as a form of naturalism. However, to say naturalism is correct is about as meaningful as to say that empires are Imperial. For many philosophers, naturalism is defined in tautologous terms. So unimportant task will be to shakedown one of our vaguest and most useless philosophical bugaboos. 'Naturalism', weather a weapon or term of endearment, is fatally vague, admitting of no less than 16 substantive distinct and sometimes incompatible positions. My thesis that evaluative judgments can be discerned from examining human nature is commonly labeled 'neo-Aristotelian naturalism', but I am comfortable with the label 'neo-Stoic naturalism', 'natural law', simple 'naturalism,' and I am comfortable throwing out the label altogether in favor of a restatement of the core thesis.   One consequence of my thesis is that some iteration of naturalism is correct. I construe 'naturalism' very broadly, as a set of doctrines and methods reflecting on what is natural including human nature -- but then again, 'naturalism' is so multiply ambiguous this may not be a significant consequence after all. 

      **God** It also follows up two significant corollaries to the main thesis. If true, this thesis has a couple of significant consequences. The first is that divine commands are not *necessary* for the discovery of and justification of at least these moral judgments. In one sense, it is possible to be morally good (read: virtuous and practically wise) whether or not one has correct beliefs about God. I address objections from theists who might worry that my thesis is an affirmative answer to the question can one be good without God. Now, divine commands maybe sufficient to make known and to justify true evaluative judgments, but they're not *necessary*. And there maybe other, perhaps more specific moral judgments, moral truths, for which thorough exploration of our human nature and reflection are not adequate and for which divine commands are necessary. So it is no counterexample to my thesis that say God commands Abraham to sacrifice his son Isaac and that no earthly wisdom would have revealed to Abraham but that was the thing to do at that moment. It would be a counterexample to my thesis that say some cultures in history did not know that (say) *honesty was a virtue* until a divine command revealed this basic moral truth to them

This dissertation offers ethical arguments with self-consciously metaethical import: that is, my narrow concern is with the normativity of virtues conceived as those traits of an excellent practical rational human. But my broader concern is always with normativity in general, wherever it might be found (in language, meaning, even metaphysics).  

While the first and last chapters coordinate the three main themes, each intervening chapter shakes down some important contemporary virtue ethical thinking on that theme. 

### Apologia of such great themes 

These are age-old themes. Treating them adequately is the task of a lifetime, not a single dissertation. "The measure of listening to such discussions is the whole of life."[@plato Republic 450b.] Yet they are worthy themes. Even an inadequate treatment of a worthy theme may hope to attain to some value. To render these themes more manageable, I limit my scope to the ethical writings of contemporary "neo-Aristotelian" virtue theorists. I remain sensitive to his or her project and major claims, to the constructive arguments supporting those claims, and to the various local skirmishes that arise from particular critics. Even so, common themes emerge and this author's (perhaps idiosyncratic) commitments become clear as the dust settles. 

