{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Neil Sinclair, \'93Two Kinds of Naturalism in Ethics\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\i\b0 \cf0 Ethical Theory and Moral Practice
\i0  9:417-439, 2006. 
\i \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\i0\b \cf0 Overview:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Sinclair argues that one sort of naturalistic ethics demands that moral properties playing a role in good empirical theories (on par with the natural and social sciences) \'97 but neither Railton nor McDowell satisfy this condition. A second sort of naturalistic ethics doesn\'92t so demand. And this one is true. On realism and naturalism, all that moral properties need explain is the truth or falsehood of some agent\'92s moral beliefs. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Synopsis:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Some naturalist ethicists demand that moral properties can only be naturalised if \'93moral properties feature in good explanations of certain observable non-moral events\'94 (417). But if we do not demand this we can still be naturalists, and still wonder whether \'93moral factors feature in explanations of agents\'92 material success, or processes of social change, but the answer to this question will not affect one\'92s position on the nature of moral properties\'94 (418). \
\
A defining property must explain the intuitive force of the term (so for morality that means explain the inherent to-be-done-ness of moral concepts) and be naturalistic (so for morality, according to Railton, that means that the moral \'93facts contribute to the 
\i a posteriori 
\i0 explanation of certain features of our experience\'94(421)). And Railton thinks that to be naturalistically respectable his definitions must satisfy both. Sinclair argues that Railton does not satisfy the latter. \
\
Railton thinks moral norms are interpersonal and impartial \'97 they \'93reflect a certain kind of rationality, rationality not from the point of view of any particular individual, but from what might be called a social point of view\'94 (422). This social point of view of \'93instrumentally rational agents\'94 approve those PHIs that are in the interests of \'93all potentially affected individuals counted equally under conditions of full and vivid information\'94 (423). Thus moral rightness is response dependent; it depends on the response of ideally instrumentally rational people. What is the property itself? It must be dispositional. It is identical to \'91being disposed to elicit approval from ideal people, etc.\'92 \
\
The property does explanatory work when we explain, say, social instability, by positing that the institutional arrangements are wrong (427). The problem is that by wrongness we mean that some ideally rational agents actually obtain in the society and (because of their ideally rational reflection) disapprove of the social institutions. Or, if those people don\'92t obtain, then (implausibly) the idealised counterfactual situation 
\i that ideal agents would disapprove if they existed 
\i0 somehow does causal work.\
\
Suppose the \'93ground\'94 of the dispositional property (liable to cause disapproval) is the \'93significant discounting of the interests of a particular group\'94 (431). Then that discounting would cause the disapproval and explain the unrest, but now 
\i it 
\i0 (and not wrongness) is doing the explanatory work. The property of discounting the interests of others is not identical to the property of wrongness, so it cannot be a common property to all categorial grounds of dispositional properties (there are some kinds of discounting others\'92 interests that are not wrong). \
\
Sinclair proposes that such considerations apply to \'93any naturalist who hopes to account for moral properties in dispositional terms and who accepts the condition on naturalistic respectability imposed by the first kind of naturalism in ethics\'94 (435). The dilemma is this: \
\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 1.	If moral properties are dispositional properties, they are not very explanatory (can\'92t feature in \'93good empirical theories\'94), because the ideal conditions (or infrequently actualized conditions) in which an ideal observer properly reacts to them; but if moral properties are the categorical grounds of dispositional properties, then they are not very explanatory (can\'92t feature in\'94good empirical theories\'94) because there is no a priori guarantee that those grounds are explanatory. \
2.	Either moral properties are dispositional properties or the categorical grounds of dispositional properties. \
3.	So either way, moral properties cannot are not very explanatory (can\'92t feature in \'93good empirical theories\'94).  \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 \
So the naturalist can keep looking for an account of the property of moral wrongness that 
\i can 
\i0 figure in good empirical theories or else stop looking for an account that figures in good empirical theories (that is still somehow naturalistic). \
\
If our naturalistic epistemology limits our ontology, then we can only know 
\i p 
\i0 exists if 
\i p 
\i0 is part of an explanation for, say, a causal empirical theory (437). But Sinclair urges that what moral properties explain is not paradigmatic natural phenomena but people\'92s changes of moral beliefs. In other words, the natural phenomena that moral properties can explain are not agent-independent but the truth or falsehood or change in agent\'92s moral judgments. Actual people can more closely satisfy the conditions of an ideal person (instrumentally rational) and thus change their moral beliefs to \'93successfully \'91track\'92 the responses of instrumentally rational people when in the relevant idealised situation\'94 (438). \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Reflections:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 To be naturalistic, according to Sinclair, the values under examination must be empirically verifiable. That is, our ontology should be limited by our epistemic access to the properties in question; we should only believe what is 
\i real 
\i0 is what is useful or explanatory in explaining phenomena. Railton thinks they must feature in plausible explanations of non-moral facts, but Sinclair argues against this. \
\
This article may be useful in arguing against one move in the ethical naturalist\'92s argument \'97 namely, arguing that moral properties are like other (natural) properties in that they can and should be known empirically and used in empirical explanations. I\'92m not sure what to make of Sinclair\'92s \'93second kind of naturalism.\'94 \
\
}