{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc4\levelnfcn4\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{lower-alpha\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid102\'02\'01.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listlevel\levelnfc2\levelnfcn2\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{lower-roman\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid103\'02\'02.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li2160\lin2160 }{\listname ;}\listid2}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 David Copp, \'93Why Naturalism?\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\i\b0 \cf0 Ethical Theory and Moral Practice, 
\i0 Vol. 6, No. 2 Papers Presented to the Annual Conference of the British Society for Ethical Theory
\i , 
\i0 April 2002 pp. 179-200
\i \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\i0\b \cf0 Overview:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Copp argues that naturalism ought to be the notion that moral properties are empirical \'97 that there is no synthetic proposition about a moral property that does not admit of empirical evidence against it. As he says, the crux of the matter is \'93whether any synthetic proposition about the instantiation of a moral property is \'93strongly 
\i a priori
\i0 \'94 in that it does not admit of empirical evidence against it\'94 (Abstract). His definition of \'93strongly a priori\'94 is that of a proposition that can be reasonably believed without empirical evidence and that cannot be refuted by empirical evidence (including testimony).  As he says \'93no proposition is such that both, it can be reasonably believed without empirical evidence, and it admits no empirical evidence against it\'94 (192). \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Synopsis:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 Introduction\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 1.	Copp\'92s goal is not to say that naturalism is true, nor to defend it against familiar objections (179). He wants to motivate naturalism. \
2.	An ethical naturalist \'93holds that there are moral properties... rightness, goodness... and... that these properties...are \'91natural\'92 (179). \
3.	Ethical naturalism is distinct from \'91unrestricted naturalism\'92 \'97 naturalism about mathematics. One can be one or the other without being both. He takes ethical naturalism as a species of moral realism.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Moore\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 4.	Moore\'92s characterisation of naturalism is that \'93ethics is an empirical or positive science: its conclusions could all be established by means of empirical observation and induction\'94 (181); Copp thinks analytic moral truths known a priori might be part of ethical naturalism \'97 so we ought to say synthetic moral truths must be empirical; and that knowledge of the instantiation of moral properties must be empirical. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Contemporary Conceptions of Natural Properties\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 5.	There are four approaches to defining nature: (A) reductionism (B) ostensive definitions (C) metaphysical definitions (D) epistemic definitions (182)\
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl1\cf0 a.	Reductionism looks for subvenient properties that relate to moral properties. But even non-naturalists can grant that moral properties supervene on the non-moral; and reductionism does not tell us what is \'91natural\'92 about the natural property.\
b.	Ostensive definitions (like Frank Jackson\'92s) point to familiar exemplars of natural objects, tables, mountains, etc. and define \'91natural properties\'92 as those \'91needed to give a complete account of things like them\'94 (183, quoting Jackson, 
\i From Metaphysics to Ethics, 
\i0 p.7). But a non-naturalist can \'93insist that moral properties\'94 need be included in a complete account.\
c.	Metaphysical definitions define natural properties in metaphysical terms, either as:\
\pard\tx1800\tx2160\pardeftab720\li2160\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl2\cf0 i.	\'93descriptive\'94 or \'93factual\'94 properties. But we predicate \'93goodness\'94 and \'93compassion\'94 of people both descriptively and factually. \
ii.	the causal order. But it cannot be assumed the the natural order is necessarily causal, since at the most fundamental level of physics there may be no causes; also, even theistic accounts of the universe include God as a part of the causal order, so this definition does not exclude supernatural causation..\
iii.	as the \'91spatiotemporal manifold\'92, the \'93conjunction of all states of affairs in space and time\'94 (184). But Platonistic properties are not in space-time.\
iv.	as the material or physical world. But ethical naturalism need not be physicalistic/materialistic. \
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl1\cf0 d.	Epistemic definitions treat science as our \'93most reliable source of empirical knowledge\'94 but also allow other kinds of empirical (but non-scientific) knowledge, like knowledge of street names, popular foods, and what not. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 6.	Copp explicates naturalism \'93in terms of the empirical\'94 not necessarily that sub-set of the empirical that is the scientific. \
7.	Natural Properties as Empirical Properties\
8.	There may be conceptual or analytic truths like \'93murder is wrong\'94, but there are no synthetic moral truths except those known a posteriori. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf0 The Synthetic A Priori\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 9.	\'93The naturalist\'92s thesis that all of our knowledge of synthetic moral truths is empirical commits the naturalist to denying the synthetic a priori in ethics. The naturalist is committed to rejecting the possibility of a priori knowledge of synthetic moral truths while the non-naturalist is committed to embracing this possibility. The non-naturalist is therefore allied with Moore and Kant while the naturalists are lined up on the other side. The pivotal issue is whether there can be synthetic a priori knowledge in ethics\'94 (187).\
10.	  There is a distinction between strongly a priori and weakly a priori \'97 weakly a priori (borrowing terms from Hartry Field) means it can be reasonably believed without empirical evidence but is empirically defeasible \'97 strongly a priori can be reasonably believed without empirical evidence and empirical evidence could not discount it. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Ethical Naturalism and the Strongly A Priori\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 11.	\'93The underlying idea is that moral truths reflect empirical facts about human nature, the needs of societies, and the like\'94 (191) \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf0 \
Reflections:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
}