{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red102\green102\blue102;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat143\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Thelma Z. Lavine and Clarence J. Robinson. "Modernity and the Spirit of Naturalism", Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association, Vol. 65, No. 3 (Nov., 1991), pp. 73-83 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Overview:\
Synopsis:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Naturalis is a paradigm and method, hopeful of monism in method and in object. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 \
75 \'93Modernity is the conflict and confluence of the Enlightenment and the Romantic Counter-Enlightenment cognitive views, each subverting and delegitimating the other's conception of human nature, truth, morality, politics and the appropriate method for knowing them.\'94 \
\
75-76\
\
But by the end of the 18th century only instrumental reason survived skeptical challenges to the intuitions of Enlightenment Modernity. A new phase of Modernity, Romantic Modernity, arose in cultural protest against the disenchanted, despiritualized, increasingly mechanized, technological world of Enlightenment scientific reason; and it arose in political protest against the Enlightenment, waging the Wars of Liberation from Napoleon, the symbol of Enlightenment domination. Romantic Modernity arose as a cognitive framework linked to Enlightenment Modernity as its antithesis. The intuitions of Romanticism crystallized into a counter-framework of opposing conceptualizations: in opposition to Enlightenment primacy of reason, Romanticism affirms the primacy of spirit; in opposition to the scientific focus on fact and externality, Romanticism takes the inward path of subjectivity; in opposition to scientific reason in its pursuit of objective and valid knowledge, Romanticism holds to the truths of history, culture, the arts, the dialectic of personal and collective will; in opposition to the natural rights political autonomy of the Enlightenment individual, Romanticism asserts a politics of the group, of collectivism of the left or right; in opposition to Enlightenment-style rational liberation from the historical domination of church and state falsity, Romantic liberation is from the hegemony of the Enlightenment mentality in its abstract, ahistorical universalism, objectivism, and realism, and from the resulting bureaucrati- zation of the social world. Here in Romantic Modernity we discover the counter- tradition to the Enlightenment.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 III. American Naturalistic Pragmatism and the Conflicts of Modernity\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
76 \'93America was born into modernity with the sailing of the Arabella in the spring of 1630, arriving in America in late June under the dissenting religious banner of the Protestant Reformaton...\'94\
\
77 \'93Classical American philosophy (naturalistic pragmatism) came into being as an intellectual and moral response to the post-Civil War national problematic situation brought on by the effects of Enlightenmet modernization on American life\'94\
\
78 Naturalism is continuity of analysis between all kinds of investigation. A \'93single model of inquiry appiciable to problem-solving in everyday life and in all areas of the natural and social sciences\'94. \
\
Pragmatism avoids the errors of idealism and anti-foundationalism and traditionalism \'97 and affords us the wisdom avialble in our time. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf2 Reflections:\
}