{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 What are we trying to explain? \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 That we ought to love each other is true if anything is true. Whatever I want you to do for me, I should do for you. Many of subsequent reflections about naturalism and about virtue are attempts to do justice to this truth. \
Life as lived is puzzling. Among the many puzzles that confront us, some of the most enduringly fun and bewildering are ethical puzzles about how we know what is good and whether there is a good at all.  These questions are given a special bite. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Not moral guidance
\b0 \
The explananda that our metaethical theorizing aims to explain is not easy to define. Here are some things I don\'92t think we are trying to explain: we are not trying to give moral guidance to the morally confused. Most people have firm moral convictions on a wide range of issues. Theists have ready-made moralities on a wide range of issues given to them, they take it, by god. Atheists as it happens often have a wide range of moral beliefs based on the responsibility we have as humans if we are alone in the universe and solely responsible for our destinies, our disasters, and our hopes. In 
\i An Atheist\'92s Guide to Reality
\i0  by Alex Rosenburg, as a popular middlebrow example, he lays out how atheists ought to approach personal, interpersonal, and political challenges that life puts before each of us. By contrast, Peter Kreeft\'92s  
\i Making Choices
\i0  is a theistic version of much the same guide. \

\b \
Not just disagreement but agreement
\b0 \
There are certainly moral disagreements at a cultural level, [which we have already had occasion to mention: abortion, sexual ethics, family ethics, international law, legal policy, foreign policy, poverty and wealth, religious freedom, freedom of speech, etc.] and within sub-cultures and even within each of us. But disagreement is most often between parties dedicated to a firm moral conviction. We are therefore not doing metaethics to give the morally confused a bit of advice. We are usually doing metaethics to examine why we have the moral beliefs we do, and whether they can be justified. If they can\'92t be justified, then we may want some suggestion as to whether to discard them, to hold them with quietism, to hold them \'93ironically\'94 as Rorty suggests, and so on. \

\b \
Normativity
\b0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://C52B644B-E97C-40A6-A925-C953007637EC"}}{\fldrslt \cf0 What we are puzzling over is 
\i normativity
\i0 . In light of naturalism broadly construed \'97 in light of modern empirical science and reductive philosophy \'97 we are puzzling over the contrast between norms and everything else non-normative. Everything that is puzzling, from naturalistic assumptions, about moral norms is equally or almost equally puzzling about epistemic norms, as Professor Cuneo has labored to show. (@Cuneo %) For this reason, it would be wrong-headed and myopic to speak only of moral norms. All of these are interesting and more or less puzzling: Epistemic norms, aesthetic norms, political norms (laws), prudential norms, norms of intentionality in both thought and language, mathematical and logical norms, even norms of etiquette and grammar. Peter Schaber distills this list into ought-statements, value-statements, and reason-statements. (% @Schaber 1)\
}}\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0   \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 Normativity as it shows up in everyday utterances like \'93that was a good movie, thanks for the recommendation\'94 or she is a good teacher; you should take her class\'94 but also much more: Normativity shows up in my private thoughts (\'93how can I lose weight? what is wrong with my health?\'94) in communication (\'93what do you think of your Sienna? Is it better or worse than your old Odyssey?\'94) and in deliberation (\'93what is to be done with Iran? Is Guantanomo Bay to be shut down?\'94). We are trying to explain the pervasiveness of normativity. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://7C311860-1A97-40A8-9227-EBEFE1B3389E"}}{\fldrslt \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
"Philosophical appeals to normativity are also exceptionally widespread. In addition to the subjects traditionally considered \'91normative\'92\'97ethics, practical reason, political and legal philosophy and epistemology\'97it is increasingly common for philosophers to maintain that normativity is essential in the analysis of subjects as diverse as truth, meaning, probability and psychological attitudes like belief."}}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Finlay, \'93Recent work on Normativity\'94, 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Analysis
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. % Add vol. Year, number
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Practical Reason
\b0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 Our life, not just our biological life, is full of goals. Whether our biology is full of goals \'97 is teleologically oriented \'97 is an important question. But our psychological, social, and political life is most emphatically goal-oriented. We do not just live but we live 
\i for. 
\i0 We live for each other, for our job, for love, for the hope of a better society, for our children, for pleasure, for God, for 
\i something. 
\i0 What explains this? \
\
\'93
\f2\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
MacIntyre convincingly proves that rationality and ethics are inseparable; that it is impossible for the unjust person to think rationally, or for the irrational person to be just. Consequently, the liberal presumption of a shared, ahistorical, \'93objective\'94 rationality which can be brought to bear to resolve differences in values and conceptions of justice, is a delusion. He further shows that no conception of justice and ethical life is possible outside of some real community in some place at some time, and that liberalism, despite its protestations, is 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
a tradition
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, along with founding fathers, sacred texts, hierarchy, political power, social interests, institutions, etc., etc., like any other tradition, and he discloses the particular features of modernity which underlie liberal individualism. Liberalism differs from other traditions though, in it does not recognise itself as a tradition, harbours the illusion that it is able to fully comprehend other traditional modes of thought, and subsume their needs within itself, and that it is invulnerable to criticism from outside of liberalism. This self-deception leaves it vulnerable.\'94 (Andy Blunden, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://home.mira.net/~andy/works/macintyre.htm"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
http://home.mira.net/~andy/works/macintyre.htm}}) 
\f0\fs28 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Objective Purport 1\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Furthermore, our evaluative talk purports to be 
\i about 
\i0 facts. Peter Schaber says, \'93\'93\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A normative fact is, I take it in accordance with the usual understanding of the concept of a fact, what corresponds to a true normative statement.\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up13 \'94\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0  (@Schaber 1) \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Michael Smith summarizes one of the two \'94features of morality" as "we seem to think moral questions have correct answers; that the correct answers are made correct by objective moral facts" (Smith, 1994, 8). \
\
It would be helpful to this end to be able to account for why some things seem objective (morality, etiquette, fashion, grammar) but also why only some are objective (morality), or to explain the objective skeleton of grammar and etiquette with the subjective bones. For example, it might be that injunctions like \'93don\'92t be rude\'94 hold as part of a theory of objective value, universal, and cross-cultural \'97 but that the exact specifications of what counts as rude in 21
\fs18 \super st
\fs28 \nosupersub  century America are not universal, objective, or cross-culturally true.  \
}