{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\
### Purely biological nature is irrelevant to ethics objection\
\
The other side of the same coin is the objection that if there is such thing as "human nature", it is nothing more or less than our biological and physiological makeup. Tim Lewens argues that "the only biologically respectable notion of human nature that remains is an extremely permissive one that names the reliable dispositions of the human species as a whole. This conception offers no ethical guidance..."[@lewens2012human] \
\
On Lewens' view, the only talk about our "nature" that would be scientific would be an indeterminate series of complicated stories about our genetics, evolutionary history, and neurophysiology, perhaps even including cultural, geographical, and ecological settings. The problem, of course, is that an empirical "scientific" conception of human nature has nothing to do with *ethics*. All of the complicated stories we could tell -- if they are genuinely scientific -- would be purely *descriptive*.[Cf. @hursthouse1998virtue chapter 10; @brown2008virtue chapter 5; @ward2013against] Likewise, Arthur Ward argues that "naturalists should reject the idea of \'93human nature,\'94 and indeed should reject that any organism or its parts or operations has a nature, purpose, proper function, or the like."[@ward2013against 1] \
\
Fitzpatrick's main worry, not that we have evolved poorly, but that we evolved at all.[@sepmoralitybiology] He argues that evolved organisms have a telos to reproduce, not to "flourish".\
\
\
Even if "natural norms" such as those argued for in the previous chapter existed, this objection says, they would be irrelevant from the practical point of view.[@frey. Her dissertation is a full-scale rebuttal of this objection. I shall review her arguments in a later chapter.]  For if objective norms may be known from an external, scientific point of view, even so, they are impractical; human rationality allows us to reflect upon them and decide whether or not to allow them to count as reasons for action. Alternately, if norms of practical reason are knowable from within the practical (subjective, internal, non-scientific) point of view, then they the objective facts of our nature are irrelevant. If by being practical reasoners we are free of the tyranny of biology, then biology is irrelevant to morality.  Hursthouse assumes that knowledge of humanity "from the outside" is useless or futile. She says, "Ethical naturalism is not to be construed as the attempt to ground ethical evaluations in a scientific account of human nature."[@hursthouse1998virtue especially chapter 10] Hursthouse and McDowell's alternative is to base ethical considerations on our nature as rational agents. This is still loosely naturalistic, in that we are talking about "human nature" or "second nature".  }