{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 12. I have argued that virtues are "merely" human, but also argued that that human nature is normative; therefore, the proposition that virtues are normative is deduced from the major premise. There are still problems to be solved; specifically the relation between reason and nature. \
\
The two sorts are what I have called Organic Naturalism and Practical Naturalism. (Julia Annas draws the same distinction in terms of biological and rational.) As we have already seen, virtue ethicists tend to pick one or the other, or vacillate between one and the other, or try to bridge the apparent gap between them. Where they can agree is that somehow human nature, our nature as practical reasoning animals, must have normativity 'built-in' so to speak. When Christopher Toner, for example, draws out same distinction between the kinds of naturalism, he agrees with Hursthouse that the term 'Aristotelian naturalism' "implies that human nature is normative, such that to be morally good is to fulfill one's nature."[@toner2008sorts 221.] \
\
The question is just how to do that. Is human nature just another example of a biological nature, like chimpanzees and dolphins, subject to evaluation by the same patterns of normativity? Or is humanity something quite different, on account of our rational self-awareness and practical agency? \
\
\
Chris Toner argues that the natural norms must be intrinsically motivating (or practical), they must be intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of that nature (upon reflection, they seem binding, even if they do not mechanically determine one's action); they must be anchored in and express universal human nature; and first and second nature must be related in such a way that the second nature is an outgrowth of the first so that that in our given makeup is (first) natural which does tend toward an ethically mature second nature. \
\
Toner argues that the brands of naturalism espoused by Thompson, Hursthouse, and Foot \'97 the same sort I have defended above \'97 cannot adequately respond to a criticism McDowell (among others) have pressed. \
\
Yet even though McDowell is critical of Foot's biological or organic naturalism, he does not wish to fall into a dualism between biology and rationality. Rather, he believes that it is possible to "formulate a conception of reason that is, in one sense, naturalistic: a formed state of practical reason is one's second nature, not something that dictates to one's nature from outside."[@mcdowell1998two] \
\
Toner presents four criteria that \'93naturalism must deliver if it is to support a revived Aristotelian virtue ethics\'85\'94[@toner2008sorts 222]  \
\
1. Natural norms must be intrinsically able to motivate the bearer of the nature. \uc0\u8232 \
The "natural norm" must be intrinsically able to motivate: desires that *do* motivate us satisfy this requirement. However, unless there is some "supervising principle" that coordinates desires (suppressing some, elevating others) the desires themselves seem to lead us to a sub-moral life; and the addition of such a supervising principle makes the theory no longer naturalistic. \
\
2. Natural norms must be intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of the nature. \
\
The natural norm must be something that justifies itself, either to all rational agents as such or to all moral agents. The norm need not, Toner admits, automatically persuade a Callicles to repent of his wickedness. However, it must be able to motivate. \
\
>This is why I say \'91\'91intrinsically able to motivate or justify\'92\'92 rather than \'91\'91intrinsically motivating or justifying\'92\'92: the natural norm is such that it can motivate or convince persons, provided they are not in too dysfunctional a state. In the same way a rose is such as to be intrinsically able to convince us of its being red. Its failure actually to do so in my case because I am color-blind or jaundiced does not impugn this intrinsic ability. Natural norms can motivate and convince because they are neither \'91\'91mere facts\'92\'92 about the way a given species does go on nor \'91\'91brute desires\'92\'92 a given species happens to have as a result of its evolutionary history.[@toner2008sorts 235]\
\
Micah Lott calls this the "authority-of-nature challenge"^[In @lott2012moral 770]. "The challenge depends on an apparent gap between what naturally good for us qua human beings (=the normal) and what has a claim upon our reason (=the normative)." Natural norms are either "normal" (i.e., natural) or "normative" (i.e., binding, authoritative, etc.)\uc0\u8232 \
3. Natural norms must be anchored in and express universal human nature. \
\
This was the task of chapter 3. \
\
4. First and second nature must be related so that the second is a natural outgrowth of the first, and so that that in our given makeup is (first) natural which does tend toward an ethically mature second nature. \
\
\
\
>I do not presume to have achieved anything in the neighborhood of a demonstration of MacIntyre\'92s, or even of a broadly MacIntyrean, naturalism. I have tried only to show what an Aristotelian naturalism, which takes human nature as normative (such that to be morally good is to perfect one\'92s nature), would need to say; and to show that, among the main forms of "updated" Aristotelian naturalism on offer, something along the lines articulated by MacIntyre comes closest to saying it. Although I have tried to anticipate and turn aside some important objections, whether the MacIntyrean sort of naturalism is acceptable ultimately depends on answers to some rather large questions involving the nature of rationality (for example, whether it is tradition-constituted in something like the way MacIntyre says).[@toner2008sorts 248]\
}