{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## McDowell\
\
We begin with McDowell's account of practical knowledge. He argued that identifying acting well demands "a moral outlook".[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] McDowell therefore thinks such knowledge is not "objective" in the desired sense. \
\
He acknowledges that we *desire* an external, scientific, sideways on, third-person, "objective" stance from which to identify the rules of rational thinking, but denies that such a stance is possible. \
\
When confronted with the notion that the external stance is impossible, we feel a "vertigo". We feel anxious that nothing keeps our thinking "on the rails." We must simply accept that we cannot think from a third-person, detached, \'93sideways on\'94 point of view; we can only think from within our point of view. \
\
He says, \'93The cure for the vertigo, then, is to give up on the idea that philosophical thought, about the sorts of practice in question, should be undertaken at some external standpoint, outside our immersion in our familiar forms of life.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 341] This is part of the movement toward his thesis that that virtues are ethical qualities that only make sense \'91from within\'92, that they lend a certain kind of perceptive ability to their bearers. \
\
In short, his solution to the problem of the "vertigo" we feel when contemplating the dependence of our rational concept-application on nothing more than our shared form of life.\
\
McDowell points out the familiar case of a discussion or disagreement that end at loggerheads, with both parties asking "But don't you see?" Although it is tempting to want to resolve such loggerheads by appeal to a third-personal point of view standing outside either of our forms of life, McDowell thinks it must be resolved, if at all, from firmly within our form of life. That is not to say that persuasion is not possible. He reassures us that the "Don't you see?" question "can often be supplemented with words aimed at persuasion."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342] Rather, persuasion will consist in "bring[ing] someone to see it as one wants", in one or both parties appreciating reasons they may not have seen before. It sometimes takes efforts to make someone see (to make oneself or others see) "the right way to handle a given situation."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342]\
\
Consider a quotation from R. Jay Wallace explaining the distinct approach of constructivism about practical reason: \
\
>[The constructivist] approach denies that practical reason is a capacity for reflection about an objective domain of independent normative facts; but it equally rejects the expressivist's naturalistic suspicion of normativity. According to the constructivist, practical reason is governed by genuine normative constraints, but what makes these constraints normative is precisely their relation to the will of the agents whose decisions they govern. The principles of practical reason are constitutive principles of rational agency, binding on us insofar as we necessarily commit ourselves to complying with them in willing anything at all. The realm of the normative, on this approach, is not pictured as a body of truths or facts that are prior to and independent of the will; rather, it is taken to be \'91constructed\'92 by agents through their own volitional activity.[@seppracticalreason, section 2]\
\
MacIntyre's theory may be considered a kind of cultural constructivism.\
\
}