{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 I shall argue that practical reason is both intersubjective and objective. My answer arises from an examination of McDowell and MacIntyre's concept of tradition. \
\
McDowell's account provides an excellent starting point but needs supplementation. He argues that reason is *at least* intersubjective and depends on a shared form of life. However, his account wallows in relativism, and his only counsel is to accept it. \
\
MacIntyre, however, gives a robust account of how the intersubjectivity of practical reason does not necessarily exclude objectivity. In response to McDowell's accusation that the search for response-independent objectivity is merely a fear of the truth, we can see that response-independent objectivity is essential to the ability to make progress within a tradition, to criticize one's own tradition and to assess the relative merits of rival traditions. \
\
Nevertheless, these discussions are notoriously difficult. The explanation of that difficulty, I argue, is that we can only think *about* rationality *with* rationality. We can only reflection upon our thinking process by observing rationality *from outside* from  *within* rationality. Hence, there are complications having to do with the self-referential or iterative nature of the discussion. \
\
These complications should lead us to predict that conceptions of rationality will differ more than other difficult concepts. If two parties share an identical conception of rationality, then a long and arduous debate is not necessary; if two parties enjoy differing conceptions that differ in a sufficient number of respects, a long and arduous debate is not likely to resolve the difference. As the Greek proverb asks, "if we choke on food, we drink water to wash it down. If water chokes us, what shall we drink?" And indeed, MacIntyre especially gives us a recursive theory of rationality adequate (or almost adequate) to the task of both capturing what is common in differing conceptions of rationality and helping to enhance the possibility of resolving disagreements. \
}