{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 We do not want to examine the whole world and ignore ourselves. Imagine a scientist who studied every medium-size, sense-perceptible object in his lab without microscope or telescope. He inspected, catalogued, described, named, and defined each object. But at the end of the inquiry he had discovered no human eyeballs. \'93Aha! All that talk of eyes and eyeballs in literature and history is mere mythology, a remnant of a pre-scientific era, a relic of a barbarous age!\'94 And in his book of findings he makes a point to debunk the myth that there are such things as eyeballs. His evidence is that, of course, he has examined everything in the whole lab and there are no eyeballs there \'97 none detached and awaiting inspection.  We do not want to be like that scientist!\
In fact, we would not call him a scientist at the moment he is making poor inductive generalizations on the basis of a flawed sample \'97 anymore than we call a doctor \'91a doctor\'92 at the moment he is flipping through a magazine or misdiagnosing an illness. \
Imagine a second scientist who studied every microscopic particle, organism, fungus, bacterium, chemical, etc., in the world but came to the conclusion that there are no such things as microcopes. \'93Microscopes\'94 he would proclaim with confidence and a touch of disdain, \'93do not feature irreducibly in any of the scientific descriptions of bacteria, fungi, yeast, or inorganic matter. There is simply no evidence for them.\'94 This kind of foolishness must be avoided. \
}