{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red53\green53\blue53;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\deftab560
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 Can I construct an analytical outline now?\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	1.	}Nature is normative, there are natural norms.\
{\listtext	2.	}Natural norms are expressible in generic propositions.\
{\listtext	3.	}Scientific realism is true. So there are natural kinds, generic fax, or formal.\
{\listtext	4.	}Generics also express functional facts, which are natural teleological facts.\
{\listtext	5.	}This teleology is scientific. \
{\listtext	6.	}These generics are true of all living things.\
{\listtext	7.	}Humans are living things so there are some generic for a few minutes.\
{\listtext	8.	}The generic that human beings are rational animals truth. \
{\listtext	9.	}That we are rational animals entails the presence of a bunch of properties, including some functional facts.\
{\listtext	10.	}Are function is at least on the face of it to become fully human, and to perform a characteristic works. We should not assume that we have one such work such as rational activity, because it may be that the function is to rationalize are, to the best. To make our body and our property and our clothing and so on rational.\
{\listtext	11.	}Virtues would be those qualities therefore that are formally part of being a rational animal and that is living a life of rational animals and becoming fully rational and fully mature.\
{\listtext	12.	}That is just with the new Aristotelians say.\
{\listtext	13.	}Virtus pertain to social, linguistic, intellectual, and practical activities, as per the analytic definition of practical rationality.\
{\listtext	14.	}Moderation is a virtue and his self regarding.\
{\listtext	15.	}Tolerance is a virtue and his other Re:, and helps us to tolerate differences and even mistakes in our fellow animals.\
{\listtext	16.	}All of the virtues are united within practical rationality, and so practical reason. Practical reason is what we are eating important sense. And practical reason does not separate from our inability. Animal. If it were, but McDowell would be right about a dualism, between humanity in nature. Air animal and culture. But he is not. Nature is unrestricted, which is agnostic.\
{\listtext	17.	}Practical reason is by definition the orientation to do good and avoid evil. But does not mean of course that we always do good or that we always aim to do things we know we're good. It means that the only reason we do things we know are bad, is in pursuit of some good. Unaliened apologist could learn this to if they were practical animals. So this truth is discoverable from within and from without the practical point of you. Practical reason is also objective, it interacts with the moral order, or practical order, or space of reasons as a whole.\
{\listtext	18.	}Practical wisdom is especially important because it blocks individual relativism, United the virtues, and perfects out nature even more than intellectual wisdoms. but is practical wisdom itself culturally relative? Yes and no. To see that it is not relative requires one to be in the proper culture. In the wrong culture, one night mistakenly believe that it is relative. This is a paradox that cannot be resolved blithely. McIntyre does probably the best job of attempting to resolve it. This kind of practical wisdom is compatible with affirming the value of virtue tolerance and moral objectivity.\
{\listtext	19.	}Our human function is minimally, to become fully human, but must include some knowledge. What knowledge? At the very minimum, a knowledge of our human telos. \
{\listtext	20.	}Our end is death. Individually. The end of our species is extinction. Is there any point to becoming virtuous, is there any point to becoming human? There seems to be. This is a matter of some faith however.\
{\listtext	21.	}Two choices face us, remain human, become human, including excepting our mortality as a species. Or attempt to become transhumant or post-human, including space travel, genetic modification, and so on. \
}