{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://70DD19B9-21B8-4F9F-95A9-2E7C21A64789"}}{\fldrslt \cf0 Super Introduction}}\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 MacIntyre\'92s oeuvre may be seen as a response to the problem of disagreement in ethics. His response parallels in important ways (but also differs from) the response of Kuhn and Feyaraband to disagreement in natural sciences. MacIntyre was frustrated by his own and others\'92 failure to settle moral disagreements from within a settled version of moral inquiry, so he sought a way to stand outside rival versions of ethical inquiry. But even the metaethicists (like Moore) are examples of a version of moral inquiry rather than exceptions. So MacIntyre\'92s project might be cheekily described as meta-metaethics. \
The key works 
\i After Virtue, Whose Justice? Which Rationality?, 
\i0 and 
\i Three Rival Versions of Moral Inquiry 
\i0 tell a story about the history of ethics. That story has many facets, but the upshot is clear: (1) moral inquiry in particular, and practical rational activity in general, can 
\i only 
\i0 be done within the context of an embodied, social tradition. What is less clear is that (1) does not (MacIntyre insists) assume or imply relativism. Traditions can be wrong; paradigms can (and sometimes need to be) overturned; entire lines of inquiry can cohere more or less with themselves but fail to match the facts. \
Not surprisingly, then, MacIntyre thinks 
\i his tradition 
\i0 \'97 Aristotelianism-Thomism \'97 is right. Surprisingly, though, he thinks that members of rival traditions can (and should) look for and find the self-contradictions 
\i in their own 
\i0 tradition rather than simply evaluate the costs/benefits of \'93switching\'94 clubs. The upshot for those who are persuaded by his arguments is not (as it is for Rorty) that \'93I am right that no one is right, so it doesn\'92t really matter if you disagree\'94 or (as Harman) \'93I am right so you are right too.\'94 The upshot for MacIntyre is \'93I am right, so you are wrong; but I can see why you think I am wrong and you are right; you should critique and judge your tradition by its own standards.\'94\
The reason behind this somewhat surprising thought is that (thinking from within the perspective of my tradition) I will get a rival tradition\'92s putative costs and benefits all wrong. Rating X as a cost rather than a benefit 
\i is itself an item of my tradition. 
\i0 The rival tradition may rate X as a benefit rather than a cost. The only way to truly evaluate a rival tradition is to be motivated to engage in an act of \'93philosophical imagination,\'94 to step 
\i into 
\i0 that tradition, if only hypothetically and imaginatively. To \'93feel my way around\'94 in it. To try it on. But the motivation to try on another tradition is not common. That kind of motivation probably only springs from a deeply-felt dissatisfaction with one\'92s own tradition, which itself stems from the kind of (sadly rare) critical self-examination of one\'92s own tradition by its own standards. \
In this chapter, I shall re-tell some (but certainly not all) of the story that MacIntyre tells about modern moral philosophy, beginning with 
\i After Virtue. \

\i0 The moral of the story, for us, will be to draw from MacIntyre\'92s writing arguments:\
1.  The first is the ineliminable and essential place of 
\i telos 
\i0 in both human psychology, virtue ethics, and human biology. The much maligned and much misunderstood term \'93teleology\'94 is applied (not very controversially) to human end-directed behavior like planning a trip, giving a paper, playing sports, running for office, pursuing a mate, and so on; \'93teleology\'94 is also applied (very controversially) to organic systems (the nervous system, the circulatory system), organs (the eye, the liver), organisms (deer, humans), animal behaviors (leaping, crying), animal \'93programs\'94 (surviving, reproducing), and even to non-organic systems. \'93Global teleology\'94 also refers to the notion (sometimes associated with magic or religion) that the cosmos as a whole is end-directed, with each part playing a role as instruments in an orchestra. MacIntyre\'92s early work defends the former use of teleology: human thought and practice are necessarily and essentially end-directed. But his later work (
\i Dependent Rational Animals
\i0 ) defends even the much misunderstood possibility that biological or physiological natural systems and processes are end-directed, even absent the assumption of a deity. \
2. The second is the presumptive case for moral cognitivism and moral realism. The literature debating cognitivism and non-cognitivism is vast and intricate. The literature debating moral realisms and anti-realism (not to mention the literature 
\i debating the terms of the debate
\i0 ) is even more vast. We cannot hope, in this chapter, to engage of all it. But we can undermine some of the motivation that points us toward non-cognitivism in the first place. Metaethical non-cognitivism begins with a doubt about our moral discourse (especially doubts in the face of widespread, intractable moral disagreement).  MacIntyre in this chapter (and Foot in the next chapter) will give us some reason to doubt our doubts. Diagnosing the source of our (interminable, shrill) moral disagreement differently than Moore and Mackie, Ayer, Stevenson, Gibbard et. al., MacIntyre (and Foot) think that moral cognitivism arise as (defeasible) presumptions.  \
We will build on these two planks to build our own virtue theory and foundation for virtue. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://8E451421-A22C-4D95-AC1B-98B920274F53"}}{\fldrslt \cf0 Even as I keep these goals in mind, I must be sensitive to MacIntyre\'92s aims, structure, and style. \
}}\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
Section Introduction After Virtue:\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 MacIntyre\'92s 
\i After Virtue 
\i0 is (for the first half) an inference to the best explanation. What is he trying to explain? The present chaos of moral theory and moral discourse in academia and in our broader culture. Because he is trying to explain a phenomenon so broad and loose, inevitably his book\'92s theorizing is large and loose. We must attempt to keep our summary within bounds. \
MacIntyre\'92s thesis in 
\i After Virtue 
\i0 seems impossible to summarize in one sentence. But I shall try. The thesis (as a first attempt) is: the Aristotelian tradition, defined in part by Aristotle and in part by \'93its own internal arguments and conflicts\'94
\f1 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0 MacIntyre, 
\i After Virtue 
\i0 260.
\f1 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0  \'93can be restated in a way that restores intelligibility and rationality to our moral and social attitudes and commitments\'94
\f1 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0 MacIntyre, 
\i After Virtue 
\i0 259.
\f1 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0  but that Nietzsche among others shows that its primary modern rival \'97 the \'93liberal individualism\'94 of Enlightenment thinkers  \'97 cannot be given a \'93coherent rationally defensible statement.\'94}