{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 The labor of the essays comprising this dissertation has been to defend the claim that human virtue is not (merely) a part of nature, and that virtuous humans are not (merely) part of nature, if by nature we mean the non-living or the living non-human parts of existence. \
It has not been my task to defend the claim that virtue is real. Moral nihilism or radical skepticism are still viable \'93outs\'94 from this conclusion for those who want to avoid it but who are persuaded by the dilemma. In this chapter I would like to very briefly address the anti-realist or nihilist option. Building off the moral realist arguments from Shaffer-Landau, Thomas Nagel, Philippa Foot, and more, I defend the claim that the best understanding of the facts of our moral thinking and the best explanation of our moral behavior are the realist understanding and explanation. Other explanations are so obviously false that they can only be tenable in light of the threatening consequences of becoming a realist. Other explanations are not soothing, comforting \'97 they bring us face to face with the \'93horror of the normative.\'94\
Philippa Foot concludes Natural Goodness with an essay on Nietzsche and moral skepticism. Is skepticism a rational possibility? \
\
###Draft 2\
The labor of these chapters has been to defend the claim that virtue theory of a paradigmatic sort is the most adequate explanation we have of a non-trivial set of explananda that puzzle us when we reflect on life as lived, and that the question of whether such a theory is \'91naturalistic\'92 is misguided. Ethical naturalism, depending on how one takes the term, is either inevitably going to succeed or inevitably doomed to failure. Such a range of intension is not philosophically tolerable. Rather, I have argued, the unambiguous and meaningful question is whether we must opt for a theistic ethical naturalism or an atheistic ethical naturalism. \
}