{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid2\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid102\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid2}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Reflections
\b0 \
I find MacIntyre\'92s philosophical theories highly interesting. But others find them infuriating. In this section, I attempt to surface objections to a variety of MacIntyre\'92s positions. For an account so ambitious in scope, it is easy to nitpick errors or unclarities here and there. I shall attempt to bring to light major objections from MacIntyre\'92s critics. So, what objections and misunderstandings arise? \
\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Misunderstandings and Objections\

\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	1.	}The first objection from some is simply to deny MacIntyre\'92s governing assumptions. MacIntyre\'92s \'93
\i After Virtue 
\i0 Project\'94 is an extended explanation of the \'93moral disaster\'94 of modernity. But where is the disaster? (Pullitzer-prize winning novelist and theologian Marilynn Robinson posed this question.) To put it lightly, some readers will be puzzled by MacIntyre\'92s assessment of our dire state; his assessment simply will not accord with their experience of moral disagreement. They still have hope in modern morality. To put it more bluntly: they will be bewildered. Without the explanandum the explanans is pointless, and MacIntyre\'92s life\'92s work will seem to them to be pointless. What\'92s all the fuss about? On this objection, rationalistic ethics just 
\i are
\i0  possible. Kant and Hume and Moore et. al are not total failures. And the contemporary metaethical debates continue unabated. \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}MacIntyre\'92s response might be that only someone who has seen the failures of her own tradition is \'93in the market\'94 for new solutions. Only the hungry eat. Nancy Murphy gives a MacIntyrean account of theism and naturalism as rival traditions. 
\f2 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0 Murphy, \'93Naturalism and Theism as Competing Traditions\'94 in 
\i How Successful is Naturalism 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Naturalism and Theism as Competing Traditions\'94, Gasser (ed), 2007.
\f2 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0  Perhaps the only way, she argues, to assess the strength of 
\i another 
\i0 tradition is to first critically assess the weaknesses of 
\i one\'92s own 
\i0 tradition. This project she undertakes. As a theist, she points out what she sees as the critical weaknesses of her own tradition. Rather than address and resolve each one, Murphy
\i  models 
\i0 for the metaphysical naturalist how he ought to take responsibility for the weaknesses of naturalism as well. The proponent of what MacIntyre calls \'93modern liberalism\'94 in its various forms \'97 the Kantian, the consequentialist, even the virtue ethicist \'97 is invited to critically reflect on his or her own tradition. If, after such a self-examination, MacIntyre\'92s critiques still hold no interest, then it seems acceptable to let it go. But if any one discovers any inkling of vulnerability, of weakness, of dissatisfaction \'97 if, in short, MacIntyre\'92s diagnosis becomes intelligible \'97 then MacIntyre\'92s prognosis becomes highly interesting. \
\ls1\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}The second response to this flummox is this: clearly, there are different worldview. And a rival worldview is so different as to not merely appear as a rival but as \'93crazy.\'94 Those of us who resonate with MacIntyre\'92s profound dissatisfaction with modernity find his prognoses at least interesting, if not right; plausible, if not correct. We also feel flummoxed at postmodern philosophers and masters of suspicion \'97 Marx, Nietzsche, Fouccoult, Rorty, Leotard, Derrida \'97 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	2.	}A second objection comes from those convinced that (what MacIntyre calls) Nietzscheanism is true. MacIntyre sets up modern moral philosophies as (failed) masks for Nietzsche, the only alternative to which is Aristotle. On this objection, the dilemma is correct, but he chooses the wrong side. All moral discourse that appeals to rationality, divine law, human nature, tradition or any other such nonsense beside the individual will is a mask. The only real and authentic spring of morality is, of course, the Will to Power. The pursuit of knowledge through research and argumentation is the pursuit of power or proceeds by operations of power. \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}This objection I simply cannot respond to. To accept that truth is impossible to achieve is to give up on philosophy altogether. I still have faith in philosophy. So I deny that truth is impossible. \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3.	}A third objection \'97 more of a misunderstanding \'97 is that MacIntyre is still fundamentally a modern. Some critics interpreted \'93virtue\'94 as synonymous with \'93dutiful\'94 (I.e., adhering to some moral law) or morally correct. \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}Such an objection misses (or willfully ignores) MacIntyre\'92s account of the insufficiency of such thin moral terms. Our moral activity and moral inquiry and moral discourse are only intelligible in the context of socially-embodied traditions as well as the practices (and often institutions) that constitute those traditions. If his account is right, then it is simply impossible to abstract a meaning for the word \'91right\'92 from the tradition in which it appears. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 It is challenging to pick apart such a multifaceted and interlocking series of positions and to criticize them in isolation. Therefore, I invite the reader to exercise philosophical imagination with me. Let us envision a world in which virtues as qualities that enable us to pursue the goods internal to practices, and see practices themselves as embedded in traditions which are \'93historically extended arguments\'94 requires philosophical imagination. Even with this vision in mind, some objections arise. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Objections
\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	1.	}
\b Relativism
\b0 . A very different objection arises from someone who agrees with MacIntyre that modern moral discourse is a confused and chaotic mess. This objector might agree that virtues are relative to practices, to communities, and to human life as a whole. \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls2\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}J. L. A. Smart\'92s refutation of this charge is the one I take as most instructive. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	2.	}Historicism is false. Timeless moral truth, accessible from the view from no where, is possible. The dilemma \'97 that we must either embrace Nietzsche or Aristotle \'97 is false. \
{\listtext	4.	}Which of MacIntyre\'92s concepts of \'92virtue\'92 is the primary sense of virtue? Aristotle\'92s conception of virtue is that virtues are acquired human qualities (habits) that contribute to (and are at least partially constitutive of) eudaemonia. Those qualities that contribute to the good internal to a practice we might call skills. Skills are relative to practices, and not all practices contribute to eudaemonia. Some (grand theft, torture) are contrary to other virtues (respect for private property, kindness) and some can be plausibly seen as neutral (table tennis?). Therefore, not all MacIntyrean virtues qualify as Aristotelian virtues. \
{\listtext	5.	}Another group think that Aristotle\'92s account of virtues must be presented within a Aristotelian philosophy of nature, the \'93metaphysical biology\'94 MacIntyre rejects (
\i After Virtue 
\i0 162). Such a metaphysical biology is part of Aristotle\'92s metaphysics of nature, including the doctrine that final causes are just as natural as efficient causes. Now, even 
\i after 
\i0 MacIntyre changed his mind to accept that \'93the teleology of human action flowed from a metaphysical foundation in the nature of the human person\'94 (Lutz%, 
\i Whose Justice? Which Rationality? 
\i0 Chapter 10; 
\i After Virtue, 
\i0 3
\fs16 \super rd
\fs24 \nosupersub  edition, xi), he did not argue from that metaphysical foundation. Rather, he continued to argue not from teleological metaphysics but from the appearances of teleological activity \'97 practical reasoning, practice, and moral education. As we shall see, Foot and Stephen Brown 
\i are 
\i0 going to advance similar arguments on the basis of a metaphysical doctrine of nature (or at least of living things); and John McDowell is going to criticize such arguments. But for MacIntyre, that conversation is a sideshow. \
}