{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs20 \cf0 ### Conclusion of introduction\
These conclusions are, of course, tersely put. Our job in this chapter is to unpack them. And these conclusions are subject to various important objections. Our job is to articulate and respond to (some of) them.  \
\
But it is worth saying at the outset that MacIntyre readers fall into two broad camps: those who are, on the whole, more critical of modernity, and those who, on the whole, are less critical of modernity. The former group tend to find MacIntyre's diagnosis compelling and his solutions exhilarating.  Restoring historical perspective on ethics, restoring ethical reasoning to its place within practical reasoning, and restoring *telos* promises to make available the resources of the older, Aristotelian tradition of virtue. The hope of a restored morality brings with it the hope of a restoration of social and political integrity. MacIntyre invites such readers to see the point of education, politics, and social life once again the acquisition and exercise of virtues, to restore an intelligibility to these activities and pursuits that many of us moderns can hardly imagine. \
 \
The latter group tend to find MacIntyre's criticisms excessively polemical and his solutions needlessly radical. He invites such readers to reflect on themselves and on our common history. But even if there is nothing of interest in his criticisms and solutions, they are invited to consider his solutions in a spirit of philosophical imagination. "*If* modernity had these fatal flaws, would this solution be a good one?"\
\
\
MacIntyre's lifework has been an invitation to recover the tradition of virtues. But virtues are not free-floating moral concepts; they are embedded in a specific, living, moral tradition -- the Aristotelian tradition. This is one of MacIntyre's recurring themes: ethical concepts have *a history*. That is, we can only responsibly use or evaluate our own ethical terms and concepts when we have some historical perspective on them. Furthermore, *we* have a history. Practical concepts such as the self, practice, the *telos* or end of life, and virtue are all  MacIntyre realized that we all inhabit a tradition -- even putatively anti-traditionalist moderns. So we must know ourselves as members of a tradition, as members of a historically-extended social community with its own conceptual resources. These themes -- tradition have guided the construction of MacIntyre's virtue theory. \
}