{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 As I see it, virtue defined by practice can already be significantly contrasted against mere *happiness* or *pleasure* as found in Mill, and against mere *duty* or *good will* as found in Kant. On the one hand, the standards by which farmers judge each other are not static and universal formal laws. They are \'93contentful,\'94 immanent, flexible standards. On the other hand, the standards by which practitioners judge each other are not all \'93external\'94 ; they are not merely an arbitrary set of social conventions. Farmers cannot get together and decide farming is no longer about husbandry but is about selling land along highways for billboard advertisements. The practice itself, with its history and its aims, has a structure that is persists across generations and flexes, but does not break, with varying standards. That structure is passed along, modified, but modified according to an inner logic. \
\
Many have agreed with Elizabeth Anscombe\'92s characterization of consequentialism more generally that it views all consequences merely contingent goods. Such a view reduces all goods (except happiness itself) as goods of effectiveness. She puts the point in this way: \
\
>Now the consequentialist has no footing on which to say "This would be permissible, this not"; because by his own hypothesis, it is the consequences that are to decide, and he has no business to pretend that he can lay it down what possible twists a man could give doing this or that; the most he can say is: a man must not bring about this or that; he has no right to say he will, in an actual case, bring about such-and-such unless he does so-and-so.[@anscombe1958 13] \
\
I shall return to this discussion of such contingent goods in the discussion of teleology below.\
\
\
\
#### Aristotle's account\
We can see that Aristotle\'92s account includes these ingredients, all of which interlock with the others to form a coherent picture of a human being or community being excellent at life. (A) Human nature is part of nature; and for Aristotle \'93nature\'94 extends to include formal, final, material, and efficient causes.[^7] Also, our end and (to some degree) the qualities that enable us to achieve that end are natural to us. (B) The virtues are those qualities that enable persons and communities to achieve their end, which is eudaimonia. (D) The *telos* of humanity is its (natural) final cause, its end. Eudaimonia is not pleasure, not wealth, not just wisdom, but virtuous activity.\
\
[^7]: A few paraphrases may help: the the formal cause of an object is sometimes called its "structure" or "configurational state"; final cause the "function". \
\
\
### Worry about relativism ###\
\
He has already put practices into a broader teleological context wherein life *as a whole* can be virtuous. He does say that the virtue of \'93integrity or constancy\'85 of singleness of purpose in a whole life.\'94[@macintyre1984after 203] But integrity is a necessary, not sufficient, condition. Even putting human life into a unified, integrated narrative does not definitively solve the problem of relativism. For we still might worry: is there a single *telos* for human life? Is there a unity to all the virtues such that \'93wicked virtues\'94 can be excluded? And if so, is it rooted in our \'93metaphysical biology\'94 as Aristotle thought? To avoid relativism, he must justify the assumption that virtues are not neutral with respect to ends, but are actually *good* for their possessor.  \
\
\
### Concluding remarks ###\
\
\
For example, MacIntyre's theory can answer the worry about relativism discussed above. Yet for some critics the worry still clings. I would suggest that full resolution of the criticism can only come through self-reflection by the critics on themselves. MacIntyre\'92s dialectic, properly understood, invites even critics to self-reflection. This is a kind of *resolution* of the criticism. For, to accept this invitation is, in some sense, to join MacIntyre in the enquiry, which is to either lay down the criticism or persist in making it from a new vantage point within the enquiry. By contrast, to deny the invitation is not *strictly speaking an objection* but a sociological or psychological move, a decision not to become part of that enquiry. This not the \'93victory\'94 of the objection over MacIntyre\'92s theory, but a refusal to allow MacIntyre\'92s theory to define the terms of the enquiry. \
\
It should come as no surprise to us, if we have come to terms with the debate, that both sides think the other side not merely *wrong* but *irrational*. Enormous metaphilosophical disputes are in the offing. One side "just isn\'92t doing philosophy anymore." My only point here is that *which side that is* is far from clear. Or, put differently, it is all too clear to modern, liberal philosophers that Thomistic \'93philosophy\'94 isn\'92t philosophy at all.[@lutz2004tradition chapter 5.] It is all to clear to modern, Aristotelian-type philosophers that modern secular \'93philosophy\'94 isn\'92t philosophy at all. Two opponents within a tradition can think the other side mistaken but fundamentally rational. Two opponents from opposing traditions more often think the other side \'93crazy\'94 or \'93nuts\'94 or \'93mad\'94, \'93bonkers\'94, or some other synonym for less-than-rational. \
\
A second concluding remark is my tentative suggestion as to MacIntyre's legacy. One feature we might observe about great thinkers \'97 Plato, Aquinas, Kant, and a dozen of others \'97 is that they present a totalizing theory that explains many phenomena but also explains why critics criticize. Great thinkers present not only philosophical solutions to philosophical problems, but a definition or understanding of philosophy itself. They are always philosophers *and* metaphilosophers. This feature satisfies their followers and frustrates their critics. For to criticize such a thinker feels like falling into a well-laid trap. One of the signs, I believe, of MacIntyre\'92s greatness is just this feature. He presents not only isolated theories but a theoretical system in which critics, depending on their criticism, receive a name, a number, a category, a classification, and a designated response. Adherents, too, are accommodated. But to criticize MacIntyre is much trickier business than one might suspect at first. Critics find themselves dipping into one of many already well-poisoned wells, and falling into pre-laid traps. \
\
\
\
### Swift line for footnote? ###\
\
Jonathan Swift was rightly comforted at being considered a giant in Lilliput but a midget in Brobdingnag;[@swift1965gulliver Part I, chapter 2 and Part II, chapter 1] the compresence of opposite insults is a good indicator that he was a perfectly sensible size. Likewise, MacIntyre should be comforted that he is criticised for excessive rationalism by his co-religionists[@milbank2008theology] and for excessive religiosity by rationalists[@nussbaum1989recoiling]; he too progressive for traditionalists and too traditional for progressives; he is called far too liberal by conservatives and far too conservative by liberals. To quote Swift: "Philosophers are in the right when they tell us, that nothing is great or little otherwise than by Comparison." \
}