{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 #### Incoherence of the concept 'Tradition' Objection
\b0 \
\
Another, related, objection queries the concept of tradition through which, in part, MacIntyre defines virtue. This objections states that his tradition-constituted definition of rationality is self-contradictory. MacIntyre says on the one hand that, according to Tradition A, X is rational. According to Tradition B, X is not rational. They disagree and seem to genuinely disagree. A member of Tradition A can reasonably affirm that X cannot be both rational and irrational. Now, MacIntyre says that a member of Tradition B can discover some internal contradiction in Tradition B that makes her reconsider her tradition as aw hole. Perhaps she discovers that, according to Tradition B, Z is both rational and irrational. She is disconcerted by the contradiction. She decides to imaginatively entertain the possibility that Tradition A is more adequate and comes to see, over time, that Tradition A\'92s critique of Tradition B is compelling. The odd conclusion is this: affirming a contradiction is irrational for anyone in any Tradition. Now, I endorse this conclusion; if someone affirms a contradiction, and they persist in it in spite of repeated attempts to explain to them the contradiction, I would find them not just mistaken but fundamentally mentally impaired \'97  irrational. But the point is not whether the law of non-contradiction is true and a reliable criterion of rationality. The point is that MacIntyre cannot say so without contradicting himself. \
\
Suppose first that Tradition A teaches that logical contradictions are irrational, while Tradition B teaches that logical contradictions can be rational. Then the member of Tradition B that affirms a contradiction (Z is both rational and irrational) will not, by her own standards, see a problem with her affirmation. A member of Tradition A will see the problem (by his own standards), but this is nothing surprising or new. The member of Tradition B has in principle no path out of her tradition, no motivation to see her tradition as mistaken, and hence no motivation to consider Tradition A. \
\
Suppose now that Tradition A teaches that logical contradictions are irrational and Tradition B teaches the same. Now, according to MacIntyre, they agree (at least on this point) about a standard of rationality. They disagree about whether Z is rational or not, but they agree that Z cannot be both irrational and rational at the same time in the same respect. Are Tradition A and B now part of the same tradition, since they agree about the law of non-contradiction? Or are they different traditions, since they disagree about the rationality of Z? \
\

\b #### Incoherence of Tradition Objection Reply
\b0 \
\
I think it true that tradition influences our standards of rationality, justice, and virtue, but demonstrably false that it *constitutes* such standards. The law of non-contradiction is the counterexample. \
\
Every tradition affirms the law of non-contradiction; every tradition denies rational agents the right to believe (P & ~P). Any tradition that denies the law of non-contradiction, it seems to me, is an irrational tradition. And I don\'92t just intend to say it is irrational relative to my own standards of rationality, but that it is irrational full stop and possible to \'93step outside\'94 my tradition far enough to see that. If there even does exist any person (such as Nagarjuna) or community or tradition that affirms (P & ~P), we ought not interpret them as having a different standard of rationality but rather we ought to interpret them as believing that rationality is an obstacle to nirvana. Affirming contradictions is still irrational, but it is the kind of irrationality needed to do violence to the limits of rationality and transcend them. \
\
So I think MacIntyre\'92s unqualified claims about tradition constituting rationality should be limited to claims about other standards for acceptable kinds of evidence, etc.}