{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## Practical Rationality\
The capacities for speech, thought, rational practice, and creation\
\
The generic I aim to substantiate is that human beings are practical, rational animals. We are animals of a peculiar sort. \
\
What  properties are entailed in the concept of rationality and practical rationality? Rational capacities are identified by the actions of rational creatures. John Haldane quotes the motto of the medieval scholastics: "acting follows being" and "things are specified by their power."[@haldane1998return 262] We use terms like 'rational' or 'reasonable' or 'reason' as abstractions to describe a set of capacities we *just do* notice. For example, activities that get called 'rational' are activities such as to observe, to perceive as, and reflect; to remember, predict, and categorize; to decide, determine and pursue; to abstract, explain, and infer; to criticize, blame, and praise; to admonish, prohibit, and command; and so on.  The alien anthropologist, if indeed it had enough of its own rationality to be able to have anthropological science, could observe these actions and infer the existence of the property of rationality. \
\
We must beware a couple of misunderstandings. For some unwittingly entertain the assumption that "rationality" for Aristotle meant abstract thought, theoria, and contemplative science. The capacity for abstract or "theoretical reason" is certainly an important feature of human nature and stands out from the capacities of other organisms. But it is not merely *thought* but *thoughtful action* that I would like to emphasize. \
\
Other members of the animal kingdom "think" in one sense of that term, but as far as we know, no other animal constructs theories about the cognitive capacities of the animal kingdom. Nevertheless, for our purposes, I would like to argue that being a potentially rational animal entails at least four other properties: speech, sociality, rational practice, and creativity. Let's consider each in turn, and show how they interconnect.}