{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 # Practical Reasoning\
\
*"There could be no reasons unless a rational animal has a general conception of its own good, and thus a general sense of how to live."* \\\
\
--Jennifer Frey, *The Will to Do Good*, 79. \\\
\
\
## Super-Intro\
\
The arguments of the last chapter sought to establish that virtue is the excellence of rational practice and practical reasoning proper to the human life form. Our practical rationality defines our nature, including the key features of speech, sociality, abstract thinking about philosophy, science, mathematics, psychology, and so on, and practical  action. We focused on the 'rational action' member of that conjunction. Now we must attend to 'practical reasoning'. If our nature is to be practical, rational animals, we should expect that the virtues are not only morally praiseworthy excellent practices but also a certain kind of excellence with respect to thinking and reasoning. \cf0 These are the two sides of the same paradox about our human nature. We are "embodied minds in action"[@hanna2009embodied] or "psychological animals."[@bailey2015animalism] \cf0 \
\
The three themes of this dissertation have been the three points on the "virtue triangle": virtue, practical reason, and natural teleology. I have argued that we must develop an account of virtue in dynamic relation to practical reason and to natural teleology. I must make good on my claim that a satisfying neo-Aristotelian account of virtue cannot be completed without thorough attention to practical reason. This will require several chapters. \
\
The goal of my account of practical reason is ambitious. I shall aim to offer a definition of practical reason that is plausible in its own right and that answers, or renders moot, a cluster of related worries about virtue, moral realism, moral motivation. One of the greatest attractions of the neo-Aristotelian account is that it so impressively solves a host of puzzles in a single, coherent answer. Nevertheless, when undertaking such an ambitious argument, we must not underestimate the possibility of mis-step. \cf0 The problems surrounding practical reason are the problems of human nature, individually and socially. \
\

\b 1. What is practical reason? Is it knowledge or a practical disposition? It is the capacity for engaging in the process of identifying reasons for action, namely, identifying what is objectively good and bad. It is a form of knowledge. And it does motivate, by definition. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 In developing an account of practical reason, the first problem we must address is this: Is practical reason both *practical* and *rational*? This problem has two aspects. First, if practical reason is really practical, then how is it rational? And if it is rational, how is it really practical? In other words, suppose that practical reasoning is by definition a kind of knowledge. Knowledge is theoretical, it aims to grasp what is true. So the first aspect of the problem is that theoretical knowledge cannot (by itself) motivate to action. Alternately, suppose that practical reason is by definition a kind of practical motivation or disposition to act in certain ways rather than others. Such motivations have action-guiding force and would explain why we act the way we do. The second aspect of the problem is that such dispositions are not forms of knowledge. So either practical reasoning is not *practical* (action-guiding) or it is not *reasonable*. In a very real sense, the primary challenge is to *defend the very concept of practical reason*. Even if we can answer these problems, others will surface. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
4. Is practical reasoning substantive or procedural? Is it end-directed or only means-directed? It is end-directed by definition. It aims at the good. The natural norm of reason is specific to pursuing the good. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 For example, practical reasoning is commonly supposed by some philosophers to be a means-oriented activity, not end-oriented. We reason about how to get what we desire or how to achieve our goals, but do not reason our way to our desires and goals themselves. We simply *have* desires and goals. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
5. Are moral reasons one type of practical reason? Philosophers are either dualists, monists, or pluralists about practical reason. I defend a pluralistic account.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
Another problem is the relation between two commonly recognized sorts of practical reasons: prudential and moral. [@chappell2013kalou] Are these really distinct? If so, what is the distinction? If not, is one a species of the other or are both species of another genus? In other words, do we help others because it is ultimately in our best interests (egoism) or do we help others because we can genuinely suppress our own interests (altruism)?\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 8. Does practical reasoning make natural norms irrelevant \'97 since reflecting on natural norms makes them mere data in the rational reflective process, not determinate, binding norms. \

\b0 Another problem is the "irrelevance objection" to neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism. Briefly, this objection states that "natural norms" specific to the human species may push us in a particular direction but that they cannot justify an action as moral because ethical reflection allows us to step back from such natural norms and decide against them. 
\b \
\
6. Is practical reasoning valuable, important, and objective? It is valuable, indispensable. And objective. It aims not at "values" but at practical reasons, goods that are to be pursued.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 A related problem is the status of practical reasons within (a broadly-construed) naturalism. Are such reasons objects in the world or objects, so to speak, "in our heads"? When I take it as a reason to buy my friend lunch because he just lost his job, how are we to understand the proposition "My friend just lost his job"? It is clearly descriptive fact or state of affairs, but it also seems to become something else when I take it as a reason for buying him lunch.   \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 13. Is practical reason naturalistic? Yes, on an unrestricted conception of how to live. 
\b0 Or are reasons only "in here" in us, psychological and rational, in which case humans are not natural? Or are reasons for acting "out there" in the world, not physical and not natural, in which case nature is normative? If so, is this naturalism? Is this view objective idealism? Is practical reason natural?
\b \
\
7. Is practical reasoning intersubjective only, or also objective? It is intersubjective and objective. Is it like logic, response-independent, or like etiquette, response dependent? We reason within a tradition but traditions can be, as a whole, true or false, good or bad.  \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 The final set of problems pertains to practical reasoning in social groups or "traditions." It is an empirical datum that human beings develop their capacity to recognize practical reasons within a family and society with its own idiosyncratic political, religious, and philosophical worldview. So, quite plausibly, our initial de facto set of beliefs, desires, and dispositions reflect the substantive commitments of our group. But even if practical reasons are not easily reducible to response-dependent features of each individual reasoner, we still have to ask whether they are response-dependent features of practical-rationality-traditions or whether they answer to response-independent normative facts. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
 In other words, although there is one human nature, expressed variously in different cultures, languages, customs, and thoughts -- are we forced to give up on the idea of *one human rationality*, albeit expressed variously? Is there, at bottom, a plurality of *rationalities*? Is practical reason intersubjective, like etiquette? My case for this very difficult conclusion rests on the belief, virtually incorrigible, that practical reason is *important*. It is of unquestionable intrinsic value to human beings. Furthermore, insofar as virtue is relative to rationality, rationality itself must be fixed to preserve moral realism. A practical reason can and does motivate one, all by itself; in conjunction with or absent other immediate inclinations or desires. Practical reason, furthermore, motivates when one judges that a course of action or an outcome is good in itself, that it is *desirable* in the sense that it is to be desired whether one presently desires it or not.}