{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red53\green53\blue53;
}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## Introduction to this chapter\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 In developing an account of practical reason, there are two related problems we must address. Is practical reason both *practical* and *rational*? If practical reason is really practical, then how is it rational? And if it is rational, how is it really practical? In other words, suppose that practical reasoning is by definition a kind of knowledge. Knowledge is theoretical, it aims to grasp what is true. So the first problem is that theoretical knowledge cannot (by itself) motivate to action. Alternately, suppose that practical reason is by definition a kind of practical motivation or disposition to act in certain ways rather than others. Such motivations have action-guiding force and would explain why we act the way we do. The second problem is that such dispositions are not forms of knowledge. So either practical reasoning is not *practical* (action-guiding) or it is not *reasonable*. In a very real sense, the primary challenge is to *defend the very concept of practical reason*. Even if we can answer these problems, others will surface.  I will summarize and address each new problem as it arises.\
\
## Practical Reason and knowledge\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
We can set up the discussion in this way: how should one live? McDowell says that the whole "point of engaging in ethical reflection\'85 lies in the interest of the question 'How should one live'?"[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] The answer or answers to the "how to live?" question(s) will be a *practical* answer or set of answers.  It will be an item of knowledge and also a plan or guide to living in the way specified by that knowledge. \
\
As a first pass, we can define practical reason as the capacity to answer the question of how to live. Of course, such practical reasoning may be specific, as when we resolve what to do in a particular circumstance ("should I stay or should I go?); or it may be quite general. Jay Wallace's definition is an adequate starting point: "Practical reason is the general human capacity for resolving, through reflection, the question of what one is to do."[@seppracticalreason] \
\
It seems fairly safe to include under the broad category of 'practical reasoning' a variety of related cognitive processes, including deliberating about future actions to be done, reflecting on past actions we have performed or that we have seen others perform, evaluating events and objects as desirable or undesirable. What all these have in common is the the attempt to identify (or create) *practical reasons* -- that is, reasons to \uc0\u966  or not to \u966 . \
\
Practical reasoning is thus like theoretical reasoning in at least one important respect: it is normative. Theoretical reasoning is a process by which I aim to determine *what to believe*. When I assess evidence for and against some proposition P, I am looking for *reasons* to believe P is true or false. The successful conclusion of a rational argument is the judgment that P or that not-P. (Or I may not have enough evidence to judge either way, in which case I may withhold judgment.) Similarly, when I consider a scientific hypothesis, I suppose that P and then conduct an experiment that will reveal reasons that confirm or disconfirm the supposition. To fail to believe P upon coming to know good evidence for it, or to believe P in spite of good evidence against it, is to make an intellectual error. If Q entails P and I already know and affirm that Q, then I *ought* to affirm that P.  Similarly, if some reason to \uc0\u960  entails a reason to \u966 , and I already know and am committed to \u960 , then I ought to \u966 . \
\
My contention is that the linguistic parity between \uc0\u960  and Q is not accidental. Both are a species of *reasons*, though they differ. Philippa Foot says that\cf2 \cb3  reasons of type (A)\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  are  "Reasons for acting, which we may call practical reasons" and type (B) are "Reasons for believing, which we may call evidential or demonstrative reasons." She continues: \cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 \
>A\cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 s philosophers, and therefore theoreticians, our job is of course to 
\i \cf2 \cb3 \strokec2 give
\i0 \cf2 \cb3 \strokec2  the second type of reason, arguing for or against the truth of a variety of propositions that seem to involve special problems\'97like those, for instance, about personal identity or the existence of an external world. But among these many \'91philosophical\'92 subjects we find that of the nature of practical reasons, and in this special case we shall have to give reasons of type B for theses about reasons of type A.[@foot2001natural 64-5].\
\
The difference between the two kinds of reasons is not obliterated by noticing their essential parity.  Both theoretical and practical reasoning are *active* in the sense that both require work and both light up the brain on an MRI scan. But practical reasoning results in action, where theoretical reasoning results in belief, judgment, speculation, and so on. As Jennifer Frey says, 
\f1 \cf4 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 \'93The practical order is not essentially the order of reality and truth, but the order of action and the good. It is not the order of the explanation of form, but the order of the exemplification or realization of form.\'94[@frey 2]\

\f0 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 Considering practical reason as a whole in this way helps us to understand Aristotle and the neo-Aristotelians. Jack Weinstein says: \'91The term practical rationality is derived from Aristotle\'92s *phronesis*. It is to be distinguished from *sophia*, a more technical form of reasoning. Practical rationality leads to more approximate conclusions; it takes context and relative facts into account, and it usually leads to moral or political conclusions.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 60-61] If we take philosophical ethics to be reflection on morality as a whole then, on this view, philosophical ethics is reflection on practical rationality. Practical rationality is simply the process of deciding what to do. It is the process of thinking through what to do. Or, in Gibbard\'92s unforgettable phrasing, it is \'93thinking how to live\'94.[@gibbard2009thinking] \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
### McDowell practical reasoning as knowledge\
\
With these basics in hand, let us turn to John McDowell's argument for the old Socratic thesis that virtue is a kind of knowledge. \
\
The virtuous person, McDowell argues, knows what to do. Hence, virtue is a kind of practical knowledge.  For in many cases, \cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 the answer to "how?" questions is an item of knowledge. "How do I unscrew a light bulb?" is a request for an instruction ("twist left") or set of instructions, ("first, grip the light bulb; then twist left until it comes loose.").  So McDowell argues that the virtues are various "sensitivities" to the salient facts about how to live. Virtue is a kind of knowledge, namely *practical knowledge* (a \'93disposition to act well\'94).  The answer to the question of how to live will be not just a proposition but a plan. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 To see why it makes sense to conceive of virtue as practical knowledge, suppose that some platitudinous value (say, kindness) is really a virtue. The kind person is reliably kind and is kind *on purpose*. A person who merely happens to be kind or who commits acts of kindness resulting from blind instinct does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. A person who is kind once, or even every now and then, likewise does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. Rather, a kind person is one who is regularly sensitive to a range of reasons for behaving in a particular way. The kind person, McDowell adduces, "has a reliable sensitivity to a certain sort of requirement which situations impose on behavior" and such "deliverances of a reliable sensitivity are cases of knowledge."[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] The kind person *knows* what is called for, is intentional about avoiding cruel or indifferent behavior, and so on. \
\
One inadequacy with this view is that there are a variety of reasons for action. Rather obviously, the question of what to do is in many cases not simply a question of what is kind, or fair, or just. McDowell has supported the notion that this kind of knowledge ("sensitivity to reasons") is necessary for virtue, but not that it is sufficient. For it might be that one is sensitive to what another would feel but still fail to act rightly. He gives the example of an overindulgent parent who is far *too* sensitive to the feelings of the child, or rather *not sensitive enough* to other considerations, like the considerations of fairness or child\'92s health. How does the moral knowledge that is virtue combine with other forms of knowledge or other motivations? \
\
He gives two answers:  the first is that the when a virtuous person is sensitive to the \'93requirement imposed by the situation" that requirement must exhaust his reason for acting as he does.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] It would disqualify the act as a candidate for an example of kindness if the agent performed it *because* it was kind *and because good repute was likely to follow*. If we run the same calculus on each particular virtue, we can hypothesize that virtuous agents\'92 behavior in each case is explained by their sensitivity to those particular kinds of reasons. In turn, their behavior in general (when virtuous) is explained by their sensitivity in general. He concludes: \
\
>Thus the particular virtues are not a batch of independent sensitivities. Rather, we use the concepts of the particular virtues to mark similarities and dissimilarities among the manifestations of a single sensitivity which is what virtue, in general, is: an ability to recognize requirements which situations impose on one's behavior. It is a single complex sensitivity of the sort which we are aiming to instill when we aim to inculcate a moral outlook.[@mcdowell1979virtue 333]\
\
In other words, the virtuous person is sensitive to a whole range of reasons; since reason A and reason B might commend different acts, part of virtue must be the meta-cognitive capacity to reflect upon all those reasons available to one, to rank and order them. \
\
## Is practical knowledge practical?\
\
This thesis that virtue as the sensitivity or set of sensitivities to requirements for action is not liable to persuade some. An objection familiarly attributed to Hume says that practical reasons by themselves cannot motivate, at least not by themselves. If this were so, moral reasons could not satisfy the "practical requirement". Expressivists are among the chief contemporary proponents of this objection. Expressivism is motivated in large part by the attempt to satisfy the *practical* dimension of practical reason (at the cost of the "rational" part). \
\
>Expressivism in this form suggests a naturalistic interpretation of practical reason, one that may seem appropriate to the enlightened commitments of the modern scientific world view. It is naturalistic metaphysically, insofar as it makes no commitment to the objective existence in the world of such allegedly questionable entities as values, norms, or reasons for action.[@seppracticalreason]\
\
On this familiar view, \'93cognition and volition are distinct.\'94 Practical reasoners do not simply enjoy  a \'93single complex sensitivity\'94 to what a situation requires; they also need the presence of a conative mental state (such as a desire) as well. In McDowell\'92s example, one is aware that one\'92s friend is in trouble and that the friend is able to be comforted (the cognitive bit) and a desire (or motivation or inclination or settled passion) for helping one\'92s friends (the non-cognitive bit). Surely these two *together* and neither in isolation explains the behavior. For suppose that two persons in the same situation are equipped with identical perceptual capacities and so sensitive to the same range of reasons for action, but only one of them does the right thing. If such a supposed situation were to obtain, it would disconfirm McDowell\'92s conclusion.\
\
McDowell's criticism of this objection is this: in order to even notice the salient facts (that one's friend is in trouble) one must already be sensitive to a particular range of requirements for action. The difference between the vicious and virtuous person lies not just in their desires and reactions to what they notice about the world but in the noticing itself. The morally calloused chauvinist does not notice the fact that his or her actions are causing others pain. Better, the calloused person does not notice it *as morally salient* fact. \
\
This response from McDowell is not conclusive, but it is a good start. For it highlights the deep fault line between the Humean and the Aristotelian camps. It is true that if two people are identically sensitive to a morally salient fact but act differently that virtue cannot simply be that sensitivity.  But one person's *modus ponens* is another's *modus tollens.* So if virtue is to be identified with a single complex sensitivity, then a supposed situation in which two persons perceive a situation and its practical requirements identically but act differently cannot obtain.[@mcdowell1979virtue 333] \
\
Is there anyway to bridge the divide without begging the question in either direction? McDowell suggests we look to Aristotle.  Aristotle allowed that \'93appreciation of what [a virtuous person] observes is clouded, or unfocused, by the impact of a desire to do otherwise.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 334] The point of such an allowances is that the break between the sensitivity to reasons (which is virtue) and a resultant wrong action occurs when other psychological factors interfere. What interference? McDowell mentions desires and also a \'93distortion in one\'92s appreciation\'94 of the relevant reasons.[@mcdowell1979virtue 334] \
\
This reply from McDowell is *an* answer but it too is not conclusive. For Donald Davidson argues to the effect that a person might fail to perform the resultant right action *even without such interfering factors.*McDowell responds that the point is true, but it is not an objection. Aristotle\'92s account of continence details that continence is not a virtue. Continence is better than incontinence, but not as good as virtue. The continent person is able to perform the right action because he recognizes it as right, *despite* countervailing pressures (from desires, say) to do the wrong action. Since a fully developed virtue definitionally includes having the proper motivation as well, continence is only needed in the absence of a fully developed virtue. Furthermore, the virtuous person is not always one who \'93balances\'94 reasons for X against countervailing reasons for Y. The virtuous person is the one for whom simply identifying a reason (\'93in this situation, courage requires that I run into danger\'94) silences countervailing reasons. The virtuous persons sees the danger (and perhaps feels rightly apprehensive) but also sees that courage in the face of this danger is required; the latter perception, according to McDowell, \'93silences\'94 other pressures.[@mcdowell1979virtue 335] The merely continent person has to \'93weigh\'94 reasons; the virtuous person fluently and instantly *acts* on the best reason.\
\
So McDowell's thesis is that virtue is a kind of knowledge, namely, a perceptual sensitivity to a range of facts that are conceptually defined as reasons for action. The hypothetical counterexample presented by his Humean critic is one wherein two agents are "sensitive to" or "notice" identical reasons for action but do not actually *act* identically. McDowell's response is that while noticing a requirement for action is necessarily motivating *to some extent*, other psychological factors may interfere with the resulting correct action. Nevertheless, the case is not yet settled. \
\
## A second pass at knowledge\
\
Making the case more plausible requires a second, deeper look at reasoning in general. Before I offer my response, I need to take this second look. The paradigmatic case of knowledge is theoretical knowledge, knowledge that P. But theoretical knowledge is deductive, categorical, and propositional. Deductive logic examines and codifies the necessary relations that obtain between such propositions.  So one objection states that if virtue is knowledge, and the paradigmatic kind of knowledge codifiable, then it would seem to be necessary that virtue knowledge is codifiable. However, practical knowledge or \'91knowing-what-to-do\'92 is not codifiable. Therefore, virtue must not be knowledge. (The non-cognitivist critic also assumes this deductive model of practical reasoning.) \
\
The problem with this objection, McDowell thinks, is not so much a problem with our moral theory but a problem with our conception of rationality. The problem stems from a \'93deep-rooted prejudice\'94 that rationality is a rule-following procedure. If rationality is a rule-following procedure, then it follows that *either* practical rationality and morality are likewise rule-following procedures *or* that practical rationality and morality is not, ultimately, sufficiently *rational*.  Some philosophers (often followers of Hume but not necessarily Hume himself) think that morality is a not rational domain but a domain of sentiments, desires, commitments, approvals, and so on. Other philosophers (often followers of Kant) think that morality is a rational domain and hence must be a matter of identifying first principles and \'93applying\'94 them to particular situations. But what they share in common is a belief that \'93rationality must be explicable in terms of being guided by a formulable universal principle.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] This common belief McDowell wishes to refute. MacIntyre, similarly,  denies the assumption that normative ethical rules can be derived from universal ethical principles the way we \'93apply\'94 universal logical truths to particular logical conclusions via a middle term.[@macintyre1984does.]\
\
McDowell\'92s discussion here (drawing on Wittgenstein and others) is hard to follow. The point seems to be that even apparently obvious cases where the rational thing to do is to follow an objective rule (say, by extending a series of numbers) turn out to be cases of a much messier process in which there is no such objective rule by appeal to which we can explain rational thoughts or behaviors. If Bob instructs Charlie to \'93add 2\'94 to a number and continue applying the rule indefinitely, we tend to be confident Charlie will produce \'932, 4, 6, 8,\'94 etc., which will \'93churn out the appropriate behavior with the sort of reliability which a physical mechanism, say a piece of clockwork, might have.\'94 We postulate a \'93psychological mechanism, underlying his behavior, by an inference analogous to that whereby one might hypothesize a physical structure underlying the observable motions of some inanimate object.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] The \'93ground and nature of our confidence\'94 that we will reliably apply rules is not but a common form of life. The \'91form of life\'92 is a term of art here from Wittgenstein (and quoted with approval from Stanley Cavell) that refers to that difficult-to-define process by which we learn how reliably to use words in our native language, how to make exclamations like a pained \'93ow!\'94 or an excited \'93ooh!\'94, when to laugh at jokes, and when to cry in pity. Our shared rationality, McDowell suggests, is not grounded in \'93external\'94 objective rules but in a shared form of life or what he calls a \'93congruence of subjectivities\'94.[@mcdowell1979virtue 339] McDowell admits this is a disconcerting hypothesis; it induces \'93vertigo.\'94 But, our response to such vertigo should not be to embrace a \'93consoling myth\'94. That myth he says is the two notions that (a) rule-following is a psychological mechanism that \'97 absent mistakes \'97 guarantees consistency, and that there exist objective facts of the matter over and above the congruence of subjectivities. If we abandon these two notions and embrace the model of deductive rationality as grounded only in our intersubjective form of life, then the corresponding model of practical rationality will become tenable. \
\
Although McDowell argues that virtue is not codifiable, still it is a kind of knowledge. But if virtue knowledge is not codifiable then how is it *consistent*? What guarantees that the moral person\'92s behavior is intelligibly the same from case to case? On the one hand, if moral knowledge is rational then it is consistent from case to case and situation to situation; but if, as McDowell has been arguing, both deductive reasoning and practical reasoning are not merely consistent by being like a rule-following machine or computer, how do we explain the virtuous person's reliably correct behavior? Section 5 of the article answers this question by way of Aristotle's practical syllogisms.\
\
The 'practical syllogism' takes the following shape: \
\
1. X is good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. (E.g., it is good to instantiate justice in the classroom).\
2. Z would be X. (E.g., giving everyone a chance to re-take a quiz that was unavailable due to technical problems would be instantiate justice in my classroom.)\
3. Therefore, Z would be good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. \
\
On the strictly deductive logical model, the role of the major premise is to provide rock solid universal ethical principles from which to derive particular moral duties. But McDowell resists this model. On the strictly non-cognitivist model, without universal ethical principles we are left with universal psychological states (consistent desires, plans, values, or norms). McDowell also resists this. On the non-codifiable model, what does the major premise do? Its role, he says, is to state a "certain conception of how to live... [namely] the *virtuous person's conception* of the sort of life a human being should lead."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343. Emphasis added.] It is clear upon reflection that this account is a sort of circular reasoning. For the virtuous person's conception of how to live is itself conditioned by what he called earlier 'the moral outlook'. That conception of how to live, in turn, conditions what particular saliences are noticed (what minor premises) and generates practical conclusions about what is to be done. What kind of life should a human being lead? The answer "cannot be definitively written down."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] Furthermore, "Any attempt to capture it in words will recapitulate the character of the teaching whereby it might be instilled: generalizations will be approximate at best..."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] The upshot of the combination of non-codifiability with a practical syllogistic form is that the virtuous person takes for a rule of life some conception of how to live but that this conception is part of what it means to be a virtuous person. (Hence the vertigo.)\
\
We might wonder why we are bothering about formal syllogistic reasoning at this point. But this way of understanding the practical syllogism *does* do good job of providing a plausible explanation of moral motivation (reasons one might act in some way) and moral behavior (reasons one acted that way). To paraphrase McDowell: "Explanations of judgments about what to do are explanations of actions."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342. Verbatim, he says: "The explanations, so far treated as explanations of judgments about what to do, are equally explanations of actions."] I can explain your behavior by understanding that you were concerned for your friend\'92s welfare and reached out to help. Likewise, you can explain your decision to help by assuring me that you are concerned for your friend\'92s welfare. For McDowell, the general structure of the practical syllogism is useful. He says \'93the rationality of virtue\'85 is not demonstrable from an external standpoint.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 346]\
\
## Why do we do anything? \
\
This discussion from McDowell is helpful but leaves much to be desired. McDowell argued that the virtuous person is not only sensitive to one kind of requirement (say, kindness) but sensitive to a wide range of reasons that must be ranked, ordered, and weighed before he or she can act on the practical conclusion. It is necessary to broaden the notion of perceptual sensitivity. However, he also assumed that "moral reasons" is a name for the overriding sort of practical reasons. I wish to argue that this is a subtle mistake. \
\
In order to supply some of what is missing, what is required is a step back to examine the natural of practical reasons themselves and how they relate to practical reasoning in general. I would like to argue that there is one genus of reasons for action: practical reasons. There are many species of practical reason, but proper distinction is not between "moral" and "non-moral" but between various kinds of moral reasons. \
\
 The familiar way of framing the "how should one live?" question is this: There are two sorts of motives that drive everyone: prudential reasons and moral reasons. Prudential reasons incline one to look out for oneself. One is naturally, selfishly inclined to pursue one's own happiness or well-being.  On the other hand, moral reasons drive one to look out for others. One is morally constrained to do one's duty, sometimes in accord with, but often against one's inclinations. Kant (or the stereotypical figure in the literature whom people call "Kant") presents morality as a particular set of reasons (all deriving from the moral law) that obligate one to do what is right, whether or not it is prudential. Otherwise, so long as one is doing one's duty, one can answer the "how should one live?" question with a list of prudential considerations: get a good job, save for retirement, eat healthy foods, exercise, make friends, and so on.\
\
Within this familiar frame, morality becomes especially pressing at the moment of moral dilemmas. Edmund Pincoffs distinguishes two broad conceptions of philosophical ethics he calls \'93Quandary Ethics\'94 and \'93Character Ethics.\'94 Quandary ethics is focused on the short-term resolution of immediate moral problems, either by dissolving moral perplexity or giving some (hopefully rational) basis for a particular decision or course of action. The Quandary ethicists are those Pincoffs quotes at the beginning of his article (such as Hare, Toulon, Brandt). They think that:\
\
>The business of ethics is to clarify and solve "problems", i.e. situations in which it is difficult to know what one should do; that the ultimate beneficiary of ethical analysis is the person who, in one of these situations, seeks rational ground for the decision he must make; that ethics is therefore primarily concerned to find such grounds, often conceived of as moral rules and the principles from which they can be derived; and that meta-ethics consists in the analysis of the terms, claims, and arguments which come into play in moral disputation, deliberation, and justification in problematic contexts.[@pincoffs1971quandary 552. Cf. @macintyre1984does] \
\
Like the Quandary ethicist, McDowell represents the view of moral reasons as special, perhaps overriding, kinds of reasons pertaining to the rights, obligations, or duties of one individual in relation to others. Even in asking the "how do I live?" question, a Quandary ethicist is likely assuming that the answer will include a set of moral reasons weighed against or in opposition to non-moral reasons (such as prudential reasons). \
\
But are moral reasons are *one type* of practical reason, or does any practical reason count as a "moral" reason (broadly construed)?[@foot2002virtues chapter 13, "Are Moral Reasons Overriding?"; Cf. also @mcdowell1978moral] Suppose a greeting card or an internet meme recommends that you "live well, love hard, and laugh often." Is this platitude aiming to provide you with a moral reason, a practical reason, a prudential reason, an aesthetic reason, or something else?\
\
By contrast, character ethics is focused on the long-term goal of living well by executing worthwhile goals in every day life.  Aristotle is an example of a Character Ethicist. Aristotle:\
\
>...thought of ethics as a branch of politics, which in turn he thought of as a very wide-ranging subject having to do generally with the planning of human life so that it could be lived as well as possible. Moral problems are given their due but are by no means stage-centre. The question is not so much how we should resolve perplexities as how we should live.[@pincoffs1971quandary 553-4] \
\
As Martha Nussbaum points out, a Quandary ethicist might ask \'93how do specifically moral ends and commitments figure among the ends that [a moral agent] pursues?\'94 Nussbaum clarifies:\
\
>This question is posed in a characteristically modern way, presupposing a distinction between the moral and the non-moral that is not drawn, as such, by the Greek thinkers. But if one objects to that characterization, one can rephrase it: for example, What role does concern for others for their own sake play in here scheme of ends? What role does political justice play in her scheme of ends? And so forth.\'94[@nussbaum1999virtue 174] \
\
McDowell is trying to straddle the line between the two ways the Quandary and the Character ethicist thinks about practical reasons. What is needed is distinguish our sense of 'moral' from the older sense. Foot makes a similar point: \
\
>Many if not most moral philosophers in modern times see their subject as having to do exclusively with relations between individuals or between an individual and society, and so with such things as obligations, duties, and charitable acts... \'91moral\'92 and \'91prudential\'92 considerations [are] contrasted in a way that was alien to Plato or Aristotle.[@foot2001natural 68] \
\
Certainly considerations about myself are conceptually distinct from considerations about my family, my friend, my society, or my species. And certainly there is a powerful social and psychological force to the distinction between moral and prudential, other-regarding and self-regarding,[@slote1995agent] altruistic and egoistic[@nagel1978possibility], benevolent and selfish, conscience and self-love.[@annas2009egoism; @macintyre1967egoism; @bloomfield2012eudaimonia; @huang2010self]  But getting the distinction right is crucial to understanding the kind of knowledge that virtue is. \
\
MacIntyre's earliest ethical work distinguished the significance of moral judgments compared to other kinds of judgments. In a careful critique of both intuitionists such as Moore and emotivists such as Stevenson, MacIntyre concluded that both (mistakenly) assume that moral judgments and moral terms have significance only in their referential meaning. The intuitionists, of course, concluded that moral terms refer to a non-natural property, while the emotivists concluded that moral terms do not refer to such a property and so do not refer at all. (Naturalists, later in the 20th century, argue that moral terms refer to natural properties.) MacIntyre\'92s alternative denies the assumption entirely; moral judgments \'93have their own kind of logic\'94 and their significance, like other kinds of judgments, comes from \'93exhibiting the logic of their usage.\'94[@murphy2003macintyre 118, quoting p. 73 of MacIntyre\'92s master\'92s thesis *The Significance of Moral Judgments*] The significance of moral judgments is that \'93they enable us to solve problems of appraisal and of action.\'94 Solving problems of evaluation (we might say) and action is their place in \'93a pattern of language and action\'85\'94 He continues: \
\
>Above all they arise out of the way in which we see the world and the way in which our language allows us to see the world. We cannot sufficiently emphasize the direction given to our appraisals by the language which happens to be available for our descriptions. It is as we see the facts that we judge the world.\
\
MacIntyre\'92s point is that moral judgments are not *simply* useful in moral dilemmas or quandaries. They appear, at the earliest stages of childhood development, in a pattern of usage that is inextricable from the human activities of reasoning, acting, and appraising. Evaluative judgments appear in the widest imaginable spread of human activities, from politics to playgrounds, from sociology to social life, from the practices of law and medicine to the professions of journalism and psychology, from the sciences to the arts. Even if this point be granted, moral dilemmas are not *unreal*. Moral dilemmas are a special version of our general \'93problems of appraisal and action.\'94 They may be particularly vexing, but they are no different from the general problems of how to live, how to be happy, what kinds of public policies to pursue, what apparently meaningful types of life are really meaningful. \
\
\
### History of error\
\
To make this case, it is helpful to examine how historically we came to make the familiar, but faulty, distinction between moral and non-moral reasons. Foot cites Mill as an early proponent of the distinction: \
\
>J. S. Mill, for instance, expresses this modern point of view quite explicitly, saying in his essay *On Liberty* that \'91A person who shows rashness, obstinacy, self\uc0\u8208 conceit .\'a0.\'a0. who cannot restrain himself from harmful indulgences\'92 shows faults (Mill calls them \'91self\u8208 regarding faults\'92) which \'91are not properly immoralities\'92 and while they \'91may be proofs of any amount of folly .\'a0.\'a0. are only a subject of moral reprobation when they involve a breach of duty to others, for whose sake the individual is bound to have care for himself\'92.[@foot2001natural 68]\
\
Mill distinguishes folly from immorality, where folly is failure to provide goods for oneself.  The distinction between moral and non-moral *reasons* shows up in a similar distinction between two different kinds of 'ought' or 'should'. Elizabeth Anscombe had observed in 1958 that a similar distinction (between moral and non-moral) runs between two senses of 'ought': \
\
>The terms \'93should\'94 or \'93ought\'94 or \'93needs\'94 relate to good and bad: e.g. machinery needs oil, or should or ought to be oiled, in that running without oil is bad for it, or it runs badly without oil. According to this conception, of course, "should" and "ought" are not used in a special "moral" sense when one says that a man should not bilk. (In Aristotle's sense of the term "moral" [\uc0\u942 \u952 \u953 \u954 \u972 \u962 ], they are being used in connection with a moral subject\u8209 matter: namely that of human passions and [non\u8209 technical] actions.) But they have now acquired a special so\u8209 called "moral" sense-\u8209 i.e. a sense in which they imply some absolute verdict (like one of guilty/not guilty on a man) on what is described in the "ought" sentences used in certain types of context: not merely the contexts that Aristotle would call "moral"\u8209 -passions and actions\u8209 -but also some of the contexts that he would call "intellectual.\'94[@anscombe1958]\
\
The peculiarly *moral* 'ought' means, for some, a final, verdictive ought -- like the kind of "thou shalt" language used in the Ten Commandments. But *this* kind of ought, Anscombe thinks, only makes sense in the mouth of a believer in divine law. I should prefer rather to reserve the final, verdictive ought for what Foot (following Davidson) calls what someone should do "all things considered."[@foot2001natural 57]\
\
This conceptual history illuminates that moral and non-moral reasons each exemplify, in their own ways, a broader conceptual structure of practicality. We identify *reasons to act*.  MacIntyre further summarizes the conceptual roots of the terms 'moral' and 'ethical'.\
\
>'Moral\'92 is the etymological descendant of \'91moralis\'92. But \'91moralis\'92, like its Greek predecessor *ethikos* --  Cicero invented \'91moralis\'92 to translate the Greek word in the *De Fato* -- means \'91pertaining to character\'92 where a man\'92s character is nothing other than his set dispositions to behave systematically in one way rather than another, to lead on particular kind of life... The early uses of 'moral' did not contrast with \'93\'91prudential\'92 or \'91self interested\'92\'94 nor with \'93\'91legal or \'91religious\'92... The word to which it is closest in meaning is perhaps most simply \'91practical\'92.\'94[@macintyre1984after 38] \
\
This point is not merely of historical or etymological interest (though of course, the narrow sense of the word 'moral' in discourse today is clear enough). The point is that  qualities such as benevolence and generosity we tend to call human \'93moral goodness\'94 are of a type with a *broader category of goodness*.  Foot explains: \'93I want to show that judgments usually considered to be the special subject of moral philosophy should really be seen as belonging to a wider class of evaluations of conduct with which they share a common conceptual structure.\'94 [@foot2001natural 66-67] \
\
What would happen if we re-opened our focus and looked at practical reasons as a whole? That is exactly what the broader "Character ethics" conception of practical reasons does. Julia Annas\'92 presentation of virtue as as a skill illuminates this same point, I think, beautifully. She says, "I should develop an account of virtue in which I show have central to the idea that the practical reasoning of the virtuous person is analogous in important ways\'85 to the practical reasoning of someone who's exercising a practical skill.\'94[@annas2011intelligent 3] What she calls the \'93skill analogy\'94 might be taken as problematic since it drains the peculiarly *moral* quality out of virtue. The opposite is true: The skill analogy fills the project of living daily life with the potential for virtue. The virtuous person is *good at* and not just *good* \'97 good at helping others, good at thinking ahead, good at human life. The vicious person, by contrast, is not just bad but *bad at* the essential elements of human life. Of course, being born with a paucity of natural talents is not a matter of immorality or is being born with an abundance of natural talents a matter of moral worth. Rather, the admirable person makes *good use* of his or her fortune, and the despicable person makes bad use of it. The admirable person is all the more admirable when he or she proves skillful of making good use even of very bad fortune; and the miserable person is all the more pitiable when he or she wastes even of very good fortune. \
\
\
Seen in this light, it is obvious that practical reasons can and do motivate us. There might be reasons to \uc0\u966  that I am not aware of and thus am not motivated by. Perhaps it is true that one ought to save for retirement, but I may fail to do so. The internalist urges that reasons *for me* must connect up with my motivational structure. Defined widely enough, I can agree to this way of stating things. If by "my motivational structure" we simply mean my overall disposition toward the good. I am oriented to pursue good things, and avoid bad things. Whatever may appear to me to fall under the description of 'good' I will, ipso facto, be oriented toward (whether I pursue it or merely approve of it and admire it). Whatever may appear to me to fall under the description 'bad' I will, ipso facto, oriented away from it (whether I avoid it or merely disapprobate it). \
\
Apparent counterexamples that one might furnish to disprove the point actually serve, with sufficient clarification, to reinforce it. For example, someone might say, "It's ridiculous to think that I always pursue the good, because I sometimes do wrong." Of course, sometimes we do the wrong thing. The proper response is that we perceive the bad as the good. Someone might say, "But sometimes I perceive the bad *as bad* and pursue it anyway." The response is that we sometimes take a bad or dismotivating reason into an overall reason to do something, all things considered.\
\
My view shares common features with motivational internalism; however, I do not wish to deny what is plausible in motivational externalism, that there are reasons "out there" that *would* motivate me if I knew about them but which I do not know about. However, I find the internalism/externalism labels unhelpful and shall attempt to make my case plausible not by naming my positions but by characterizing what I mean as clearly as possible. The concept of a practical reason is the concept of *what to do*, which has its "practical" or motivational component "built-in" so to speak. And while it often happens that one's practical reasons conflict or are indeterminate, nevertheless, a set of practical reasons can constitute the *overriding* practical reason: *the thing to do*, all things considered. \
\
In sum, the phrase 'moral reasons' is fatally ambiguous. In one sense, moral reasons (i.e., facts about what is good for others) are simply one type of practical reason; but in another sense, *any* practical reason (i.e., objective normative and evaluative facts about what is worth pursuing and worth avoiding) are "moral reasons".\
\
\
}