{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://28971196-82A0-4479-B60A-047F28D0AE59"}}{\fldrslt 
\f0\fs28 \cf0 \

\b How do we "explain" anything?\
\

\b0 Explanations explain phenomena that puzzle us. There are, in many cases, competing explanations that can't both be true but that are both plausible. If I find a broken window in my home office and a stick on the ground, on the face it may be that some neighborhood menace was breaking windows for fun, or that my tree outside lost a branch in the wind. An explanation is (always?) underdetermined by the data. \
 \
There are two ways to offer an explanation: as an argument (contending against others) or as a framework (aiming for consistency and coherency and plausibility). When offering the first kind of explanation qua argument it is necessary to attack other frameworks and defend one's own. When offering the second kind of explanation it is necessary to fully explicate the theory, drawing out aspects and clarifying or defending them. The plausibility of a framework then depends, for the reader, on how plausible and satisfying the framework is as a whole rather than the relatively less satisfying alternatives. \
\
Metanormative realism is an explanation of the second kind. As a framework, it answers many of our biggest questions while leaving room for research. Furthermore, it is very intuitive. It enjoys adherents among philosophers and regular people alike. If it is to be displaced, I think it needs a fairly strong objection or series of objections. }}
\f0\fs28 \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://62ADE1B6-03D4-4738-8124-8A538AAC97D7"}}{\fldrslt 
\b \cf0 Draft 2\
}}\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
}