{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red53\green53\blue53;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 # Practical, Rational Animals \
\
*"Human nature is normative, such that to be morally good is to fulfill one\'92s nature."* -- Chris Toner, "Sorts of Naturalism", 221. \\ \
\
\
## Introduction\
\
The last chapter argued that it is possible to express scientific knowledge of natural facts about organisms, such as facts about their life form and function, in generic propositions. (This was our minimal scientific realism.) This chapter addresses the status of humanity. I shall argue that humans are natural organisms. If humans are a species of natural organism, then they inherit the properties belonging to the genus. Hence, it is possible to express scientific knowledge of human organisms, including facts about our life form and functions, in generic propositions. \
\
The generic proposition I shall defend is a particular conception of the differentiam of our species. In the old classificatory schemes, philosophers provided a genus and a differentiam. As Hans Fink explains: "The nature of x is both what is special about this x and what makes this x one of the x\'92s as opposed to the y\'92s. When x is defined per genus et differentiam both the genus and the differentiating characteristic and their combination could be taken to express what is the nature of x.... Human nature is what differentiates us from the animals and the plants."[@fink 207] Specifically, the argument of this chapter is that the best way of characterizing the human life form is in a (somewhat modified) version of a traditional formula: a human being is potentially a  practical, rational animal. Fink continues: "By nature we are rational beings. Our human nature, however, is also that in virtue of which we belong to the animal kingdom and to the living organisms. By nature we are mammals. We may thus use the concept of nature to differentiate rather than include, but also to include rather than differentiate. And we may use the concept of nature to express that differentiation and inclusion should not be seen as incompatible."[@fink 207] The  generic proposition that humans are practical rational animals, I argue, captures the facts of our life form and can be demonstrated to be true from within the human point of view, and from outside it; an alien anthropologist studying human beings from its own non-human point of view could discover that humans are practical rational primates. What follows *ethically* from this is that the virtues are the qualities belonging to creatures like us. Virtues are the human specific goods-of-a-kind. Relatedly, the acquisition of virtues both causes and constitutes the actualization of our life form as practical rational animals. Truly exemplifying our life form constitutes our species-specific flourishing. \
\
In brief, the argument is: \
(1) All natural organisms exhibit formal and functional (i.e., teleological) facts which are expressible in generics. \
(2) Human beings are natural organisms.\
(3) Human beings exhibit formal and teleological facts which are expressible in generics. \
(4) Human beings are practical, rational animals. \
(5) Humans are to become practical, rational animals. \
(6) The qualities human being acquire on the way to becoming fully practical, rational animals are virtues. \
\
We already argued for (1). Let's start by supporting (2). Are human beings natural organisms? On the face of it, such an assertion would seem to be trivially true. Humans are animals \'97 primates of the chordata phylum \'97 who like every other organism live on the earth, enjoy a particular evolutionary history, and engage in activities such as eating, reproducing, sleeping, and moving about on the earth. \
\
Nevertheless, as phrased, the second premise is ambiguous. Some readers might want to disambiguate it. Two possible responses deserve mention. The first sort of reader might want to be clear that by asserting that human beings are natural organisms, they intend to assert that human beings are *merely* natural. They intend, in other words, to smuggle in a crassly reductionistic conception of 'human animal' under the guise of an innocent truism. On this conception, humans are machines made of meat just the same way that all of nature is a machine and all animals are machines. Although human beings seem unique among the animal kingdom, this response glosses over the apparent uniqueness in the name of battling human exceptionalism.  \
\
A second way of clarifying the premise that 'human beings are natural organisms' is that human beings are exceptional, especially in being rational animals. This second sort of reader might want to be clear that human beings are unique among natural organisms. They intend to smuggle in a dualistic or supernaturalistic conception of 'human being'. On this conception, human beings are ghosts in machines, or made in the image of God, or (in an unforgettable phrase from novelist Walker Percy "angelic beasts" or "bestial angels"). \
\
Between these two ways of disambiguating the premise that human beings are natural organisms, I prefer not to disambiguate it. The first reason is that discussing such matters would take us into deep metaphysical waters, while our main goal is to identify, as far as we can, what exactly characterizes our life form only in order to explore whether this examination bears any relevance to the ethics of virtue and vice. A second reason is that such calculated indeterminacy, I hope, will allow for both kinds of readers to participate in the dialectic regardless of their metaphysical commitments.\
 \
Humans are natural organisms. According to the arguments above, all of organic nature is subject to evaluation according to patterns of natural normativity. Recall Hursthouse's statement that ethical evaluations of *human beings* "depend upon our identifying what is characteristic of the species in question."[@hursthouse1998virtue chapter 9 abstract.] The 'characteristic', I take it, is a differentiam determining or defining the human life form, or nature, or archetype. By comparison to this life form, evaluations of individual human beings is possible. To take a small example, we identify speech disorders such as apraxia, muteness, and stuttering by comparison to a conception of what human speech is like. And "what human speech is like" is expressed in a series of generics: human speech consists of such-and-such range of individual sounds, such-and-such variety of pitches and voice, physiological and neurological properties of the tongue and the brain, syntactical and grammatical properties, and so on. So what generics pick out formal and teleological facts about human beings? \
\
One sort of reader might object that such a search is futile. As Stephen Brown says, "Human nature is variability itself."[@brown1999human] Other natural kinds \'97 physical, chemical, organic kinds \'97 exhibit relatively stable features: *All* metal is conductive, and *all* tigers are striped. But there is nothing true of *all* human beings. Any patterns can be subverted. A related point is that even if we found truly universal patterns within humanity, such would be irrelevant to ethics. As rational beings, we can stand back from putatively universal patterns and ask whether we ought to conform to them. In a word, perhaps human rationality frees us from the determinism of our life form. Hursthouse acknowledges this pair of objections: \
\
>\'85 ethical naturalism looks to be doomed to failure if it depends on identifying what is characteristic of human beings as a species, in the way their pleasures and pains and ways of going on are characteristic of the other species. By and large we can't identify what is characteristic of human beings as a species in this way--there is too much variety. And even if we could, it looks as though we would not allow anything we identified to carry any normative weight if we thought it was something we could change. So is ethical naturalism, after all, a non\uc0\u8208 starter?"[@hursthouse1998virtue 222.]\
\
The search for true generics about human beings and the human life form is not futile. While the desired generics cannot *ignore* or *contradict* our status as physical, living, animals, they also cannot be *merely* descriptions of our genes, organ systems, 30 billion brain neurons, and so on. They must also capture what is ethical or potentially ethical about human beings as rational creatures. As an example, "humans are language-using primates" is the kind of generic we must defend as *both* "objective" and scientific *and* practical and ethical. \
\
Offering an argument for the truth of the generic that 'humans are practical, rational animals' and addressing these objections will occupy us for this chapter and beyond. \
\
Our task is to provide a conception of human nature that is both normative and descriptive. We must first uncover, if possible, a set of scientific generics about humanity, specifying what kind of natural creature human beings are and what kind of characteristic life they live -- what kind of life they live "by nature". Such generics, it is hoped, will give us initial insight into the concept and content of virtue, excellence, wisdom, and flourishing, which are our main themes.\
\
\
## Animals of peculiar sort\
\
All humans are animals. This is not a trivial point. To be an animal entails the presence of several other properties, some of which will be seen below to have potential ethical significance. However, humans are animals of a peculiar sort in that we exhibit a unique range of thoughts and activities. Attempts to characterize human nature, then, must not only cite our *physicality* -- our relation to the physical world -- but our *animality* -- our relation to the living world as a whole.  I will first discuss the properties entailed in the concept of 'animal' (which we share with other organisms) and then discuss the properties entailed in the concept of 'practical, rational' (which differentiate us from other organisms.) \
\
To be an animal entails many things. For example, it entails a particular set of relations with respect to other animals and ecosystems. To be an animal is to belong to the "tree of life" \'97 and to have a location in the broader story of life on earth.  As Michael Mautner explains, all living things (on earth at least) share common ancestors and even share genetic material. He says:\
\
>...phylogenetic trees indicate that all terrestrial life can be traced to a common ancestor. Organisms as different from us as yeasts share half; mice, over 90%, chimpanzees, over 95%, and different human individuals share over 99% of our genome. These scientific insights give a deeper meaning to the unity of all Life. Our complex molecular patterns are common to all organic gene/protein life and distinguish us from any other phenomena of nature.[@mautner2009life 434-5]\
\
Suppose that the earth was formed about 4.5 billion years ago; that life arose on earth 3.5 billion years ago; and that anatomically modern humans arose on the earth about 200,000 years ago or in the "Late Pleistocene of 120,000 years ago."[@brown2008virtue 102] The first among our species lived in Africa. They emigrated from that landmass and settled in various parts of the globe. In contemporary classificatory scheme, we can locate humans within the phylum chordata, the class mammalia, the order of primates, the suborder haplorhini, the familiy hominidae, the genus homo, the species homo sapiens. \
\
Secondly, unlike prokaryotic organisms (such as bacteria), all mammals come to be through process of fusing dimorphic gametes, such as ova and sperm cells, into a fertilized zygote. New fertilized zygotes, once generated, grow through a process of cell division found only in eukaryotic organisms, such as fungi, plants, mammals. Meiosis is a process of division leading to the creation of new cells that each contain the same genetic material as the original. In other words, the cell divides and transmits the genetic material in the zygote to the daughter cells. However, in all such organisms it is possible that errors occur in meiosis, which results in genetic defects. The ethical implications of genetic defect in humans is profound, since such defects may underly everything from developmental disabilities to common mental illnesses.\
\
Thirdly, being an animal entails that an organism begins life as a tiny zygote and progresses through gestation to infancy, maturation, and adulthood, at which point it may reproduce itself before dying. All of these phases we notice in human animals as well. The human life cycle is characterized by various phases, including growth, language acquisition, puberty, physical maturity and characteristic activities, aging, and death. Unlike other mammals, female humans go through menopause. Humans tend to thrive best in climates averaging between 42-80 degrees Fahrenheit[@guo2014global], but some cultures live and thrive in extreme temperatures.\
\
To zoom our perspective out a bit further, we can observe that human beings (like other species) not only have a natural history, and a characteristic natural life cycle, but also a natural destiny \'97 such as extinction, or evolution into a new species, or indefinite preservation through sexual reproduction, or something else.\
\
Now, apparently innocent descriptions of human animals are inseparable from ethological and anthropological descriptions, which can blend into the normative. The property of being an animal encompasses a whole range of biological and neurophysiological facts that obtain in each normal human being. For example, humans' heights range from 4'7" to 6'3" (plus or minus) and weights range from 120-180 pounds (plus or minus). When someone suffers from a growth disorders such as dwarfism (under 4'10'' in human adults) or gigantism, we identify the disorder by reference to such generics.\
\
Humans have 23 chromosomes in each somatic cell, with about 22,000 total genes. Humans have 32 teeth and an extremely diverse diet of carbohydrates, fats, fiber, minerals, proteins, vitamins, and water: they eat vegetables, red meat, fish, nuts, seeds, berries, fruits, mushroom, mollusks, herbs, and more. Genetically modern humans don't just hunt and gather but farm, store, combine, ferment, and cook food. They have opposable thumbs, are bipedal, and walk upright. \
\
At this point in the description of the human species, the difficulty (I should say impossibility) of separating the biological, behavioral, and social conditions of being a human being becomes plain. Presumably, even an alien anthropologist who knew nothing of human language or "what it is like to be a human" would be able to notice, upon examination, that a human's laugh or cry is different from a hyena's laugh or a crocodile's tears. Part of the alien anthropologist's examination would be to examine the body, brain, and hands of human beings. For example, humans have large brains relative to other primates, with a neocortex and prefrontal cortex that correlate with abstract thinking, problem solving, society, and culture. And indeed, humans live in cultures and societies. They are language-users, communicating in signs and symbols. Their language is an extremely complex, open-ended system which is both recursive (able to nest propositions within propositions) and productive (able to create sentences by potentially limitless combinations of words). In virtue of language and their opposable thumbs, they are creative; they don't just live on the ground or under ground, but build houses and shelters, sometimes in new places, such as caves, trees, hills, mountains, etc. Also, they are self-reflective. They establish social relations upon biological grounds (some children growing up with natural parents) and upon normative grounds (some orphans growing up in orphanages created by philanthropists).\
\
### Practical Rationality\
\
The generic I aim to substantiate is that human beings are animals of a peculiar sort: humans are practical, rational animals. \
\
Practical reason (or practical rationality, which I shall use synonymously)^[Warren Quinn uses 'practical reason' to mean the faculty and 'practical rationality' to mean the excellence use of the faculty. I prefer to treat 'practical reason' and 'practical rationality' as synonymous, contrasting them with 'practical wisdom', which is the excellence thereof. Cf. @quinn1992rationality] occupies a place of importance in the theories of many virtue ethicists. Specifically, the neo-Aristotelians have each thematized practical reason in their own way.[Cf. Especially @foot2001natural, chapter 4; @mcdowell1979virtue; @macintyre1988whose] \
\
What properties are entailed in the concept of rationality and practical rationality? Rational capacities are identified by the actions of rational creatures. John Haldane quotes the motto of the medieval scholastics: "acting follows being" and "things are specified by their power."[@haldane1998return 262] As a first start, I would point out that we use terms like 'rational' or 'reasonable' or 'reason' as abstractions to describe a set of capacities we *just do* notice. For example, activities that get called 'rational' are activities such as to observe, to perceive as, and reflect; to remember, predict, and categorize; to decide, determine and pursue; to abstract, explain, and infer; to criticize, blame, and praise; to admonish, prohibit, and command; and so on.  The alien anthropologist, if indeed it had enough of its own rationality to be able to have anthropological science, could observe these actions and infer the existence of the property of rationality. \
\
We must beware a couple of misunderstandings. For some unwittingly entertain the assumption that "rationality" for Aristotle meant abstract thought, theoria, and contemplative science. The capacity for abstract or "theoretical reason" is certainly an important feature of human nature and stands out from the capacities of other organisms. But it is not merely *thought* but *thoughtful action* that I would like to emphasize. \
\
Other members of the animal kingdom "think" in one sense of that term, but as far as we know, no other animal constructs theories about the cognitive capacities of the animal kingdom. Nevertheless, for our purposes, I would like to argue that being a potentially rational animal entails at least four other properties: speech, sociality, rational practice, and creativity. Let's consider each in turn, and show how they interconnect.\
\
### Speech \
\
First, speech. We are animals who speak.[@deacon1998symbolic] Aristotle observed that, "Man alone of the animals possesses speech."^[*Politics*, 1.1253a.] Though other animals have speech and communication, nothing in modern science has superceded or contradicted the observation (obvious to anyone) that human speech is different. Other animals that communicate use non-grammatical closed systems with a small, finite set of symbols.^[Communication systems used by other animals such as bees or apes are closed systems that consist of a finite, usually very limited, number of possible ideas that can be expressed. In contrast, human language is open-ended and productive, meaning that it allows humans to produce a vast range of utterances from a finite set of elements, and to create new words and sentences.] Our language is unique: it is grammatical, open-ended, recursive, and productive. \
\
Through our animal senses comes a sensitivity to our surroundings, the ability to see the sun and moon which are millions (or hundreds of thousands) of miles away, to hear our fellow creatures, and to "take in" the whole cosmos into consciousness. But through speech comes a whole second cosmos of culture. Through speech comes intentionality in all its forms. Through speech comes communication ("pass the salt"), distinct languages and cultures (about 5,000 distinct languages), self-consciousness ("who am I?"), abstraction ("all grass is green"), science, philosophy, religion, mythology, technology and more. Perhaps even art and music arise from the rational capacity to direct our actions to create not only what instinct demands but whatever the imagination can invent.[@orians2008nature. Orians says that "Americans spend more money on music than on sex or prescription drugs."]\
\
### Sociality\
\
Secondly, sociality. Humans are political animals, Aristotle famously quipped. But we ought not interpret this in any facile way to mean that human beings prefer to reside in groups or enjoy "getting involved in politics". Rather, we ought to interpret this as a generic truth about the constitutive formal features of a human being as such. This truth is best viewed in light of our animality and speech: for to be a human being is to be a creature produced by the sexual union of two other human gametes, and to be able to speak is to be enculturated in a particular natural language in a time in human history and a place on the globe. \
\
We shall return to the importance of sociality in our discussion of traditions in a later chapter. \
\
### Rational practice\
\
Third, rational practice. All organisms *act* in the most general sense that they move about and do things. But higher mammals engage in complex (and often social) practices, such as communal hunting, grooming, and building. \
\
Humans exhibit something apparently unique, or they exhibit something rare to a unique degree. We do not just act but act on reasons. Micah Lott says: "Human form is characterized by practical reason. This is the capacity to act in light of an awareness of the ground of our actions, to recognize and respond to practical reasons."[@lott2012moral] We set goals. We undertake long, complicated sets of actions in order to achieve those goals. \
\
Under the category of 'rational practice' I would like to include everything unique about humans that has to do with morality. \
\
\
### Creation\
\
The human differentiam of 'practical rationality' entails not only abstract reasoning but speech, sociality, and practical reasoning or rational practice. The concept of 'creativity' is not metaphysically distinct from rational practice, but since it is conceptually distinct, it deserves some mention. Our speech and grammatical systems allow us to create new words, propositions, phrases, and of course to do thing like write philosophy papers or tell stories. Our social identity within a social order allows us to create living spaces, utensils, farming implements, and so on as well as to create new social orders themselves. And one of the forms practical reasoning takes is that we *innovate* \'97 we create and design and plan actions, new behaviors, new games, new languages, new activities, and so on. \
\
\
\
Michael Thompson summarizes: \
\
>"... we may view this line of thought as beginning with the idea... that will and practical reason are on the face of it just two more faculties or powers a living being may bear, on a level with the powers of sight and hearing an memory. The second crucial thought is that an individual instance of any of the latter powers \'97 sight, hearing, memory \'97 is intuitively to be judged as defective or sound, good or bad, well-working or ill-working, by reference to its bearer's life-form or kind or species."[@thompson2008life 29]\
\
\
\
\
\
\
### Potential\
\
The point of these reflections has been to bear out the truth of the generic that human beings are practical, rational animals. The first is that I must hasten to add that "humans are practical, rational animals" is a generic and so it admits of exceptions. \
\
Generics describe a life form well only when the sample includes exemplary instances of the species \'97 not young, immature, ill, or injured instances. Especially in the case of young organisms we need to invoke the notion of *potential*. Even single celled organisms have the potential to reproduce and develop. Scientists do not judge the characteristics of a newly discovered species by examining its young. \
\
The same point can be applied to those organisms, who by injury or illness, will never reveal the potentials inherit in their life form. Although that individual instance may be imperfectly actuating its species, it is still a member of the species. \
\
The importance of this point blocks a monstrous thought that humans who are not rational are not *"really"* human. Anacephalic babies are not even potentially rational, for they lack the subvenient brain structure necessary for rational consciousness, yet they are recognizably *human* (they are not opossums), just defectively so. (A war veterans is still human even if he or she is no longer bipedal!) Injury, illness, genetic defect, radiation poisoning, and any number of other negative factors may render a human being sub-rational. Coma, mental illness, and other factors may render a human being non-practical (unable to direct his or her own life to a normal degree).\
\
And an uncharitable critic might accuse me of insinuating that monstrous thought. On the contrary, one of its strengths of the fact that 'humans are practical rational animals' is a generic is that it blocks this kind of monstrous thought. For there are many people who are fully human by nature without being fully human by actualization \'97 people  who are in a coma, merely young, who have suffered a debilitating brain injury, or who have severe mental illness, and so. These are still human because they share the life form of humanity. Young humans are fully human \'97 their youth and diminutive size is no tragedy for every organism begins its life young and matures. Injured and ill humans are fully human by nature; the tragedy of injury and illness is that such cannot fully participate in their own life form; they cannot engage in characteristic activities. We must be able to capture the thought that the mentally ill or the genetic defect sufferer is abnormal, and that children are undeveloped or  immature, without slipping into the monstrous thought that they are not *human*. If people in comas, or the mentally ill, the genetically defective, are not even human then it would seem to be permissible to do all sorts of inhumanities. Robert P. George makes this point well:\
\
>Various criteria for where the line should be drawn [between living things it is permissible to use and those it is not permissible to use] have been proposed: sentience, consciousness, self-awareness, rationality, or being a moral agent (the last two come to the same thing). We will argue that the criterion is: having a rational nature, that is, having the natural capacity to reason and make free choices, a capacity it ordinarily takes months, or even years, to actualize, and which various impediments might prevent from being brought to full actualization, at least in this life. Thus, every human being has full moral worth or dignity, for every human being possesses such a rational nature.[@schulman2008human chapter 16, "The Nature and Basis of Human Dignity"]\
\
 The point of the argument above was that generic truths about humans do not inform us about what is universally distributed nor even what is statistically common but  about the life form of the species.  \
\
\
### Summary\
\
Let's sum up what we've said so far and see how it applies to virtue. The argument of the previous chapter showed how the is-ought gap is not fatal for some forms of neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism. For on this sort of ethical naturalism, all generics can be used as premises in arguments with normative conclusions. Some true generics are about humans (there are some human natural norms). Therefore, some true generics about humans can be used as premises in arguments with normative conclusions. \
\
As we said above: \
\
(1) All natural organisms exhibit formal and functional (i.e., teleological) facts which are expressible in generics. \
(2) Human beings are natural organisms.\
(3) Human beings exhibit formal and teleological facts which are expressible in generics. \
\
Now, the true generic I have been trying to substantiate is (4) that human beings are practical, rational animals. This generic is of momentous importance. Each word "animal", "practical," and "rational" entails a cluster of concepts. To be an animal is to be alive, to be a natural organism, and so on. As Mautner continues: "Life is a process whose outcome is the self-reproduction of complex molecular patterns\'92. Importantly, Life is then a process that requires a constant flow of information, matter and energy."[@mautner2009life 435] That process of life on earth has been  a continuous one, throughout time, since the first origins of life on the planet. \
\
Furthermore, we are not just "living beings" but *animals.* We come to be in similar ways as other mammals, have similar needs for oxygen, food, society, warmth, exercise, and sleep. And to be a common life form entails that each of us begins life in roughly the same way, need the same range of nutrients to grow and survive, and deserve the same respect. \
\
Finally,  something changes when we examine human beings compared to all other animals or all other natural kinds.[@hawley2011natural] We are not just animals but practical rational animals. This entails the emergence of a new set of capacities: abstract thought, speech, sociality, rational practice, and creativity. So, we can predict that just as the scientist  evaluates members of a species by how well or badly it exemplifies its particular life form, human beings are evaluable by how well or badly they exemplify their particular  life form. We continue to evaluate humans on the basis of their species, but we evaluate not just their health and normal developmental stages, and their maturity, but their *actions*. Michael Thompson summarizes: \
\
>... we may view this line of thought as beginning with the idea... that will and practical reason are on the face of it just two more faculties or powers a living being may bear, on a level with the powers of sight and hearing an memory. The second crucial thought is that an individual instance of any of the latter powers \'97 sight, hearing, memory \'97 is intuitively to be judged as defective or sound, good or bad, well-working or ill-working, by reference to its bearer's life-form or kind or species.[@thompson2008life 29]\
\
The good-of-a-kind for our species is not *only* about practical reasoning, but also about animality. For example, starving to death, or being born without limbs, or being unable to reproduce is a bad-of-a-kind for creatures like us (not a moral bad, of course, but a real misfortune). So an exemplary member of our species would have to exemplify a whole range of good properties. Hursthouse captures up the good specimen of a practical rational animal, in this way:\
\
>So, summing up, a good social animal (of one of the more sophisticated species) is one that is well fitted or endowed with respect to (i) its parts, (ii) its operations, (iii) its actions, and (iv) its desires and emotions; whether it is thus well fitted or endowed is determined by whether these four aspects well serve (1) its individual survival, (2) the continuance of its species, (3) its characteristic freedom from pain and characteristic enjoyment, and (4) the good functioning of its social group--in the ways characteristic of the species.[@hursthouse1998virtue 202]\
\
This is pretty well comprehensive. The only points I would add have to do with adding specification to the "good functioning" or flourishing of individuals and social groups, which I will do in a later chapter. \
\
Before considering the application of my argument to ethics, I would like to stop and address a few objections. \
\
## Discussion\
\
I would like to consider a couple of possible responses the reader might have at this juncture\
\
### No human nature\
\
The first objection is simply that the search for human nature is hopeless because there is no human nature. This objection has three iterations. Let's consider each in turn.\
\
### No Natural Kinds\
\
The first sort of critic might deny that there is any such thing as a human life form because there are no life forms at all. Perhaps, instead of real life forms and natural kinds, we should be nominalist about divisions between various branches of the tree of life. Evolutionary biology tells us that genetically modern humankind is the latest in a series of species. This is prima facie in tension with the notion of fixed, stable human nature. Ernst Mayr puts the alleged tension between the flexibility of evolutionary species and a fixed human nature in this way: \
\
>The concepts of unchanging essences and of complete discontinuities between every *eidos* (type) and all others make genuine evolutionary thinking impossible. I\'a0agree with those who claim that the essentialist philosophies of Aristotle and Plato are incompatible with evolutionary thinking.[@mayr1970populations 4]\
\
Arthur Ward is one who agrees with Mayr here. He argues that "naturalists should reject the idea of 'human nature,' and indeed should reject that any organism or its parts or operations has a nature, purpose, proper function, or the like."[@ward2013against 1] \
\
### Natural Kinds, but no Natural Telos\
\
Relatedly, the second sort of critic accepts natural kinds but denies that these kinds have teleological features.  Even the singular noun phrase "human nature" is liable to sound mystical, like a platonic universal underlying all human beings.  Bernard Williams summarizes the antiquated worldview that many are suspicious of:\
\
>The idea of a naturalistic ethics was born of a deeply teleological outlook, and its best expression, in many ways, is still to be found in Aristotle's philosophy, a philosophy according to which there is inherent in each natural kind of thing an appropriate way for things of that kind to behave.[Cf. @williams1995making 109] \
\
Elsewhere, Williams says:  "The first and hardest lesson of Darwinism, that there is no such teleology at all, and that there is no orchestral score provided from anywhere according to which human beings have a special part to play, still has to find its way into ethical thought."[@williams2011ethics 44]\
\
If humans are in fact a mess, then the true generics accurately picking out their characteristic behaviors would be messy; and the normative conclusions to be derived from them would be equally messy. Humans are occasionally irrational and always variable. Human beings posit themselves, create themselves, define their values, chart their destinies, and all in different ways. \
\
\
### Natural Kinds, and Natural Telos, but only Reproduction\
\
A third iteration is that if there is such thing as "human nature", it is nothing more or less than our biological and physiological makeup. Tim Lewens argues that "the only biologically respectable notion of human nature that remains is an extremely permissive one that names the reliable dispositions of the human species as a whole. This conception offers no ethical guidance..."[@lewens2012human] \
\
On Lewens' view, the only talk about our "nature" that would be scientific would be an indeterminate series of complicated stories about our genetics, evolutionary history, and neurophysiology, perhaps even including cultural, geographical, and ecological settings. The problem, as we have seen, is that an empirical "scientific" conception of human nature has nothing to do with *ethics*. All of the complicated stories we could tell -- if they are genuinely scientific -- would be purely *descriptive*.[Cf. @hursthouse1998virtue chapter 10; @brown2008virtue chapter 5; @ward2013against] \
\
Bernard Williams expresses a similar point. He says that nature has bestowed upon us an "ill-sorted bricolage of powers and instincts": \
\
>[the problem] lies not in the particular ways in which human beings may have evolved, but simply in the fact that they have evolved, and by natural selection... On that [evolutionary] view it must be the deepest desire\'97-need?-\'97purpose?--satisfaction?--of human beings to live in the way that is in this objective sense appropriate to them (the fact that modern words break up into these alternatives expresses the modern break\uc0\u8208 up of Aristotle's view).\
\
This is also Fitzpatrick's main worry, not that we have evolved poorly, but that we evolved at all.[@sepmoralitybiology] He argues that evolved organisms have a telos to reproduce, not to "flourish".  "
\fs24 \cf2 \'93If, however, natural functions and ends in living things are structured by special relations established through the process of evolution through natural selection, i.e., non-incidental relations between traits and a special subset of their effects that figured into the selection process, then natural teleology will not ultimately or generally be about the welfare or flourishing of organisms (FitzPatrick 2000).\'94\
\

\fs28 \cf0 Stephen Brown is ambivalent but seems to think that ethics is, in the end, a descriptive discipline; even virtue ethics, after being appropriately "naturalized", does not *commend* the virtues so much as *detail* the traits which happen to be adaptive for creatures like us to survive and propagate our genotype.[@brown2008virtue; @brown2005really] Although the "characteristic form of life" of human beings involves highly rarified neurological and cognitive processes we do not observe in other animals, nevertheless, nature only reveals one kind of biological concept of nature: a species. And species aim to survive and reproduce. \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\fs24 \cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\fs28 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
### Knowing from "Inside" Human Point of View\
\
Another way of putting this same criticism is that there are no objective properties obtaining in each and every human *which can be known from the objective, external, scientific point of view.* Perhaps some universal intersubjective properties obtain, like a desire for belonging; but these can only be known "from within" the human point of view. \
\
Even if "natural norms" such as those argued for in the previous chapter existed, this objection says, they would be irrelevant from the practical point of view.[@frey. Her dissertation is a full-scale rebuttal of this objection. I shall review her arguments in a later chapter.]  For if objective norms may be known from an external, scientific point of view, even so, they are impractical; human rationality allows us to reflect upon them and decide whether or not to allow them to count as reasons for action. Alternately, if norms of practical reason are knowable from within the practical (subjective, internal, non-scientific) point of view, then they the objective facts of our nature are irrelevant. If by being practical reasoners we are free of the tyranny of biology, then biology is irrelevant to morality.  Hursthouse assumes that knowledge of humanity "from the outside" is useless or futile. She says, "Ethical naturalism is not to be construed as the attempt to ground ethical evaluations in a scientific account of human nature."[@hursthouse1998virtue especially chapter 10] She emphatically *does* mean to make evaluations of human beings can be made in a way analogous to the way we evaluate cacti or deer.  In each case we rely on the notion of natural kinds and their appropriate way of behaving:\
\
>[I]n relation to which they are evaluated as good or defective. The evaluations do not\'97as they might in a post\uc0\u8208 Darwinian age\'97evaluate members of species of living things simply as good, or not so good, or downright defective, as replicators of their genes.[@hursthouse1998virtue 257-8]\
\
Hursthouse and McDowell's alternative is to base ethical considerations on our nature as rational agents. This is still loosely naturalistic, in that we are talking about "human nature" or "second nature".  \
\
### Our nature is unknown \
\
A final iteration of this objection is that human nature is just mysterious. For all we can tell (without the benefit of divine revelation) humanity is an anomaly. Our origin is shrouded in mystery, our destiny undecided. \
\
### Human Nature response\
\
These objections are formidable. However, responses are possible.  Some of the responses I will offer now will require further comment in a later chapter. Let's consider each in turn.\
\
\
### No Natural Kinds response\
\
 To the idea that there are no natural kinds, I can only give a general and unsatisfactory response. This dissertation cannot chase down the (justifiably important) conversation about realism and nominalism in natural kinds. However, the arguments of the previous chapter, built on the assumption of a minimal scientific realism, is enough to secure a fairly solid grounding for the notion of natural kinds. \
\
\
### Natural Kinds, but no Natural Telos\
\
Williams voices a common opinion when he alleges an incompatibility between Darwinism and teleological realism. The response of Hursthouse, Foot, Brown, etc., is that natural teleology is indeed compatible with Darwinism and does indeed provide a "an appropriate way to behave" (or we might add, *ways*) that is "inherent in each natural kind of thing." Such a view is not incompatible with evolutionary theory. \
\
Strictly speaking, evolutionary theory may be summarized in five theses explaining the current multiplicity and shape of terrestrial life: 1. The earth is very old; 2. Life has progressed from relatively simple to relatively complex forms; 3. Through slow and gradual changes, all the modern forms of live have appeared; 4. All of life originated from one original place and species; 5. Some mechanism such as natural selection drives the process of descent with modification. [Cf. @plantinga2011conflict 8-9.] The set of theses together explain biological processes of genetic mutation, reproduction, preservation, and proliferation. Thus, evolutionary theory, strictly speaking says absolutely nothing about teleological causes or properties.[Cf. @plantinga2011conflict 10.] \
\
A sixth thesis, often appended to the first five, is that the process of natural selection is unguided by any causes but mechanical ones. But this claim is a philosophical belief, not a biological one. Polemicists will sometimes cite the popularity of the philosophical belief among biologists as proof that it is a "biological" claim. But we do not determine truth by vote. If belief in God was popular among biologists of a certain era, it does not follow that theological claims are strictly biological claims. \
\
Thomas Nagel recently presented a persuasive (and controversial) case for what he calls "Darwinism plus" \'97 that is, naturalistic Darwinian evolution plus natural teleological causation.[@nagel2012mind] Teleological laws work impersonally on entities over time at the same moment that physical laws work impersonally on entities at a given time. I do not wish here to defend Nagel's view so much as to point out that teleological realism is compatible with evolutionary theory. Asserting that teleological realism about biology is incompatible with Darwinism does not make it so. Naturalistic teleological realism is certainly incompatible with a teleological nihilism distinctive of (certain brands) of metaphysical reductionism.  If our knowledge of natural teleology is well-grounded enough then so much the worse for metaphysical reductionism. \
\
There is another point to make. Williams despairs of finding human nature, including human telos because he thinks such despair is demanded by biological science. But Hursthouse's response to Williams is that his worry is not actually rooted in the progress of modern science. And she is right. Williams himself admits that "many of course have come to that conclusion before\'85 that human beings are to some degree a mess... for whom no form of life is likely to prove entirely satisfactory, either individually or socially."[@hursthouse1998virtue 261, quoting from Williams.] If many have come to that (philosophical) conclusion before, without the benefit of modern science, then it is a non sequitur to cite modern science as evidence for the philosophical conclusion. The argument, condensed into a caricature, is this:  "modern science is very advanced. Therefore life is absurd." \
\
Instead, Hursthouse points out, we should interpret Williams' worry as an expression of moral nihilism and despair. It may be a rational despair, but the rationality or irrationality cannot simply be read off the biological facts. Indeed, I shall pick up the theme of rational despair in a later chapter. For now I shall only say that Williams believes human nature is a mess *because* he believes no form of life is completely satisfactory for everyone. But cannot the ground and consequent be reversed? Doesn't that blade both ways? If one has hope that some form of life is or may be at least mostly satisfactory for at least some people, it makes sense to believe human nature even at its present state, mid-evolutionary process, is not *completely* a mess. If one looks to exemplary human animals who demonstrate how to live admirable and wise and just lives, even mixed with suffering or tragedy, then perhaps, even if their lives are not *completely* satisfactory, one has a sort of existential evidence that life can be *somewhat* satisfactory. And Hursthouse movingly praises hope as a virtue.\
\
>Alternatively (or perhaps as well) we could stick with what we have\'97those facts about human nature and the way human life goes that support the claim that the virtues on the standard list benefit their possessor, and the reading of human history that ascribes our persisting failure to achieve *eudaimonia* in anything but very small patches to our vices. True, it is not easy to hold on to them sometimes; despair and misanthropy are temptations. But we should.[@hursthouse1998virtue 265]\
\
For my part, I should not like to deny that human society and many, many human individuals are indeed "a mess" in one sense. Humans are a "mess" in the sense that corruption is a real feature of human life. A selected list of the dark side of our species: War, oppression, disease, genetic defect, injury, hatred, vice, a large (and ever growing) list of different kinds of injustice. These, also, are empirical facts of anthropology and psychology. I should not like to deny that *things are bad*. I should only like to make space for the possibility that things *are not all bad*. The universal optimist is obliged unrealistically to deny all the dark side of our existence. But the universal pessimist is obliged unrealistically to deny all the light side: peace and freedom, glowing health, genetic order, beauty that persists into old age, love, virtue, and the halting but admirable efforts toward justice and social harmony.  In short, the human race is quite a mixed bag. But this is all too grand and sweeping for present purposes. The only question in this section is whether the universal characteristics of human nature can be hypothesized and confirmed. \
\
Below I shall make the case that specific ethical conclusions can be derived from natural facts about human beings. Here I only wish to make room for the possibility that our data set of such facts cannot with integrity include all light and sweetness nor all dank and dark cynicism. \
\
\
\
### Natural Kinds, and Natural Telos, but only Reproduction response\
\
The third objection above is more relevant. Lewens, Fitzpatrick, and Brown urge that human nature, if it is anything, is simply to reproduce and propagate one's genotype. We are mammals, after all, and the telos of mammals is to reproduce. But this objection begs the question. We are animals, certainly. That is an empirical assertion, as I have been at pains to show. We exhibit quite a sufficient number of tell-tale properties shared by other mammals: a neocortex, hair, mammary glands, and hearts of a particular form and function. But we are also animals of a peculiar sort. That is, we are rational animals. From what we observe of ourselves both "from inside" and "from outside" we exhibit a range of properties not shared by other mammals: grammar and language, fire-making, cooking, sex for pleasure, abstract reasoning, science, philosophy, religion, mythology, agriculture. But to say that humans are *merely* mammals is an anti-empirical assertion that requires denying all this. In light of our status as practical, rational animals, it seems obvious to most people that reproduction is not our only natural telos. Reproduction is certainly *one* of our natural ends. "Human beings reproduce" is an instance of a broader natural generic truth, "organisms survive and reproduce." Human reproduction as a generic pattern is compatible with exceptions: The celibate, the pre-pubescent, the single, the infertile couple, the homosexual couple, and others do not reproduce. Nevertheless it may be true that humans reproduce (like every other organism). It may even be true that if, *as a species*, we ceased to reproduce, something would have gone wrong. That individual members of the species do not reproduce is not an automatic sign of defect; that the entire species has ceased (by choice or by injury or illness) to reproduce might be a sign of defect.[^83]\
\
[^83]: The "Voluntary Human Extinction Movement" is an example of a group who find the reasons for reproduction *as a species* to be on balance outweighed by the reasons for ceasing to reproduce.  Two comments: first, on first impression, VHEMT strikes most people as satire. It is a laughable movement. It is not necessarily mistaken, but it is certainly laughable. Secondly, VHEMT acknowledges the prima facie force of the need to reproduce. They argue that that need is outweighed. So in that they think species-wide reproduction is a default natural norm, we agree.\
\
I said that classifying reproduction as the end of humanity is obviously a mistake. This may only be "obvious" from within the practical point of view. It is obvious nonetheless. It is even obvious to Lewens, Fitzpatrick, and Brown (although Brown's faith wavers). Their point in bringing up reproduction is that we need something *more* than our natural teleology to capture the distinctively human rational process of deliberately defining teleological goals. That something more is "the practical point of view", the point of view from within human subjectivity, the \
\
The idea that natural teleological facts about human nature can only be known "within" some particular point of view is an important one, and I shall have to address it in a later chapter. For now I shall only say that slippery spatial analogies like "inside" and "outside" admit of multiple senses: "inside" can and often does mean what can be known via introspection (e.g., the way I know what it feels like to be slighted or to be praised, the way I remember the color of my grandmother's house) and what can be known from accepting limitations of a first-personal or second-personal human point of view more generally (e.g., it appears that the sun orbits the earth rather than the other way around; and I know when my mother is upset because I just "know" that look). Looking at things from the "outside" might mean what can be known via sensory perception or what can be known -- if anything -- by pretending to a neutral, objective, third-person, God's eye view. We can posit counterfactuals, as for example when we speculate what intelligent extraterrestrials would think of humans if they observed and studied our species, with fresh eyes, alongside every other. All that matters for my purposes now is that our species exhibits a range of peculiar activities that distinguish us from mammals, from animals more broadly, and from any other known natural entity in the cosmos -- and that recognizing as much is an *empirical* matter. To deny our uniqueness is rationally possible, after a long inquiry. But to be blind to our uniqueness from the outset is to be subject, in all likelihood, to philistine reductionism that has little to do with genuine scientific thinking. \
\
### Our nature is unknown\
\
The main thesis of this chapter has been that the following generic is true: "human beings are practical, rational animals." This generic, I have argued, is defensible both philosophically and scientifically. It is discoverable both by humans examining our species from "within" the human point of view and by alien anthropologists examining our species from "outside" the human point of view (so long as they too were intelligent and rational). This generic picks out a property or set of properties we might describe as 'human nature.' The final objection mentioned above is that we just do not know who or what we are. Our origin and destiny are mysterious.  This is true. But it misses the point. That humans are practical rational animals is not supposed to provide complete, comprehensive knowledge of our species. It is a minimal starting point of knowledge upon which to build. Knowing that snakes are legless reptiles is not an end to the scientific inquiry, but a beginning. Indeed, one cannot know about snakes unless one knows, roughly, what snakes are. So capturing the genus and differentiam of a kind of organism is in fact necessary for creating a conceptual placeholder *about which to attach new knowledge*. Knowing what human beings are, however roughly, gives us a concept-category within which to fill in the depth and breadth of facts and information. \
\
\
## Conclusion\
\
The sort of naturalism(s) represented by Foot, Hursthouse, and McDowell aim to ground evaluations of a member of a species on the life form of that species. The generic that 'a human being is a practical, rational animal' captures the life form of the species in a manner that is accessible to an "alien anthropologist" observing humanity from the "outside", from outside the practical point of view. The presence in humanity of such generically animal behaviors such as birthing, reproducing sexually, eating, sleeping, and dying betray a common root and identity with the animal kingdom and with the biological world as a whole; yet other human behaviors, especially language, deliberation, reflection, and intentional action betray a curious difference. As such, those qualities that enable human beings to be practical, rational animals are liable to turn out to be virtues. Those qualities of natural excellence enable the member of the species to actuate the potentials inherent in such a life form. Showing how such qualities as show up on "normal" catalog of virtues, and how perhaps even others, fall under the concept of natural excellence, is the task for the next chapter. \
}