{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red53\green53\blue53;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 # Reason and Tradition\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 7. Is practical reasoning intersubjective only, or also objective? It is intersubjective and objective. Is it like logic, response-independent, or like etiquette, response dependent? We reason within a tradition but traditions can be, as a whole, true or false, good or bad.  \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 The final set of problems pertains to practical reasoning in social groups or "traditions." It is an empirical datum that human beings develop their capacity to recognize practical reasons within a family and society with its own idiosyncratic political, religious, and philosophical worldview. So, quite plausibly, our initial de facto set of beliefs, desires, and dispositions reflect the substantive commitments of our group. But even if practical reasons are not easily reducible to response-dependent features of each individual reasoner, we still have to ask whether they are response-dependent features of practical-rationality-traditions or whether they answer to response-independent normative facts. \
\
Pretty clearly, some normative systems are constructed by the societies that endorse them. Etiquette is the typical example. Other examples include (some of) the rules of grammar, the rules of spelling and typography (Nagel). Is practical rationality a system like this?  If so, then it would seem that a plurality of practical rationalities are incorrigible. There are many etiquettes and many systems of spelling. Likewise, there would be not one human nature and human rationality but a plurality of human natures and *rationalities*? \
\
My thesis is that there is one human nature, expressed variously in different cultures, languages, customs, and thoughts -- and there is only one practical rationality, albeit expressed variously and perhaps imperfectly in various cultures. \
\
My case for this very difficult conclusion rests on the belief, virtually incorrigible, that practical reason is *important*. It is of unquestionable intrinsic value to human beings. Furthermore, insofar as virtue is relative to rationality, rationality itself must be fixed to preserve moral realism. A practical reason can and does motivate one, all by itself; in conjunction with or absent other immediate inclinations or desires. Practical reason, furthermore, motivates when one judges that a course of action or an outcome is good in itself, that it is *desirable* in the sense that it is to be desired whether one presently desires it or not.\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 Liberalism, which began as an appeal to alleged principles of shared rationality against what was felt to be the tyranny of tradition, has itself been transformed into a tradition whose continuities are partly defined by the interminability of the debate over such principles. An interminability which was from the standpoint of an earlier liberalism a grave defect to be remedied as soon as possible has become, in the eyes of some liberals at least, a kind of virtue.[@macintyre1992whose 335]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Hypocrites are humorous, especially when they do not realize their own hypocrisy. \
\
The humorous observation MacIntyre makes is that the occupant of the liberal tradition is smugly critical of the old religious and philosophical controversies which endlessly subdivided and could not be resolved to consensus by any agreed upon method and -- at the same time -- embroiled in a rational and scientific controversies which endlessly subdivide and cannot be resolved to consensus by any agreed upon method. \
\
\
}