{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### Another point about disagreement\
\
The question of how to live, and of how to resolve pressing moral disputes and dramatic moral conundrums, is not easy. There are various answers. People disagree.\
\
Anyone who has long engaged in dialectical disputes over the various answer to the normative question of how to live well eventually comes to ask a secondary question: is there even any truth to be found? Are there any \'91right answers\'92 in ethics? Is there anything to all this discussion besides gas? Some worry that ethics has no \'91right answers\'92 because it is all just intuition-pumping. Some people view ethics as too easy because it is only a discussion of one\'92s opinion. \
\
We must admit that normative ethical conclusions \'97 whatever conclusions satisfy us at the end of a long philosophical discussion about what is good and right \'97 are different from conclusions in paleontology, medicine, or calculus. What does the difference amount to? Why is ethics *as a discipline* so different from, say, natural sciences? \
\
There are two sorts of interpretations of ethics as a discipline in light of the diversity of answers to the question about how to live well. The first is Hume\'92s answer, that ethics is \'93easy\'94 (while metaphysics, philosophy of mind, and philosophical anthropology are presumably difficult). \
\
The second is Aristotle\'92s, that ethics is *a different sort of science* because it has a *different subject matter* to which it must correspond. He says, \'93For a well schooled man is wanting searches for that degree of precision in each kind of study which the nature of the subject at hand admits: is obviously just as foolish to accept arguments of probability from a mathematician has to demand strict demonstrations from an orator.\'94 [@aristotle Book I.3]\
\
By the traditional classification, ethics is a form of philosophy. Russ Shafer-Landau persuasively argues this simple equation in defense of moral realism[@shafer2007foundations ethics] but the point has broader import. If ethics is *not* a species of philosophy, it is something else entirely. Perhaps it is a species of psychology, politics, or evolutionary anthrpology. Such a categorization assumes, at the outset, that power prevails over truth. But to concede that there are no right answers in ethics, that ethical philosophers have no hope of finding any ethical truth is to give up on ethics as a discipline. \
\
So suppose ethics is a species of philosophy. The indirect answer is another question: Are there \'91right answers\'92 in philosophy? Isn\'92t the relation of philosophy in general to ethics in particular the relation of genus to species? This is the relation Russ Shafer-Landau argues for.[@shafer2012ethics] So the fate of ethical claims or ethical theories hangs on the fate of philosophical claims and theories as a whole. If we are philosophical optimists at all \'97 if we are not total skeptics or nihilists \'97 then we can be ethical optimists. \
\
So what species of philosophy is ethics? If philosophy is its genus, what is its differentia? As I have been arguing, ethics is the discipline of practical reason. There are \'91right answers\'92 in ethics since there are right ways to live one\'92s life, there are wells to live well and ways to live poorly; things can go well or badly for us. One of the fundamental governing assumptions of this work is that there is no special domain of the moral. Value theory is a whole package. There is at bottom no intelligible distinction between morality and prudence. }