{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red53\green53\blue53;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## Introduction\
\
The last chapter argued that practical reasoning is the capacity for identifying and acting on practical reasons. As practical reasoners, we observe some facts as practical reasons. I briefly argued that "practical reasons" are simply perceived goods and undesirable. Just as reason is by definition the faculty for judging true and false, practical reason by definition assesses worth and worthlessness, desirable and despicable. I also, briefly argued that this capacity *really* gets at worth, at what some "objective value." (While I do not think this term expresses my view charitably, it is a common term.) A better way of phrasing it would be to ask whether there is any reason to do anything at all. Put this way, it is more clear that every sufficiently matured human organism naturally has reasons to do some things, to pursue some ends, and reasons not to do some things, to avoid other ends. \
\
Nevertheless, this process of deciding what to do and how to live is just as messy and non-codifiable as the process of deciding what to believe and what is true.  In this chapter, I must address a broader concern. Is practical reasoning intersubjective and objective or merely intersubjective? We defended McDowell's argument to the effect that that practical reasoning is a legitimate form of reasoning. Practical rationality is rational. So the objectivity of one stands or falls with the objectivity of the other. \
\
My account of virtue, thus far, argued that virtue is excellence in rational practice and practical reasoning. The appeal to practical reason was supposed by some to resolve possible worries about cultural relativism with regard to virtue. But a new problem emerges. \
\
We have two options, each with their own attendant difficulties. If practical reason is cultural and intersubjective like logic, then it can be tolerant and pluralistic but it might seem to be culturally relative. Although there is one human nature, expressed variously in different cultures, languages, customs, and thoughts -- are we forced to give up on the idea of *one human rationality*, albeit expressed variously? Is there, at bottom, a plurality of *rationalities*? \
\
 If practical reason is universal and objective like logic, then it can be universal across cultures and traditions, but it might seem to be intolerant. So the question to be addressed is how our account can preserve the notion that reason is objective but satisfy the need for a liberal pluralism. \
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 Liberalism, which began as an appeal to alleged principles of shared rationality against what was felt to be the tyranny of tradition, has itself been transformed into a tradition whose continuities are partly defined by the interminability of the debate over such principles. An interminability which was from the standpoint of an earlier liberalism a grave defect to be remedied as soon as possible has become, in the eyes of some liberals at least, a kind of virtue.[@macintyre1992whose 335]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Hypocrites are humorous, especially when they do not realize their own hypocrisy. \
\
The humorous observation MacIntyre makes is that the occupant of the liberal tradition is smugly critical of the old religious and philosophical controversies which endlessly subdivided and could not be resolved to consensus by any agreed upon method and -- at the same time -- embroiled in a rational and scientific controversies which endlessly subdivide and cannot be resolved to consensus by any agreed upon method. \
\
\
}