{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red53\green53\blue53;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 # Practical Reasoning\
\
*"There could be no reasons unless a rational animal has a general conception of its own good, and thus a general sense of how to live."* \\\
\
--Jennifer Frey, *The Will to Do Good*, 79. \\\
\
\
## Super-Intro\
\
The arguments of the last chapter sought to establish that virtue is the excellence of rational practice and practical reasoning proper to the human life form. Our practical rationality defines our nature, including the key features of speech, sociality, abstract thinking about philosophy, science, mathematics, psychology, and so on, and practical  action. We focused on the 'rational action' member of that conjunction. Now we must attend to 'practical reasoning'. If our nature is to be practical, rational animals, we should expect that the virtues are not only morally praiseworthy excellent practices but also a certain kind of excellence with respect to thinking and reasoning. These are the two sides of the same paradox about our human nature. We are "embodied minds in action"[@hanna2009embodied] or "psychological animals."[@bailey2015animalism] \
\
The three themes of this dissertation have been the three points on the "virtue triangle": virtue, practical reason, and natural teleology. I have argued that we must develop an account of virtue in dynamic relation to practical reason and to natural teleology. I must make good on my claim that a satisfying neo-Aristotelian account of virtue cannot be completed without thorough attention to practical reason. This will require several chapters. \
\
The goal of my account of practical reason is ambitious. I shall aim to offer a definition of practical reason that is plausible in its own right and that answers, or renders moot, a cluster of related worries about virtue, moral realism, moral motivation. One of the greatest attractions of the neo-Aristotelian account is that it so impressively solves a host of puzzles in a single, coherent answer. Nevertheless, when undertaking such an ambitious argument, we must not underestimate the possibility of mis-step. I shall be forced to touch on issues that need fuller treatment. The problems surrounding practical reason are the problems of human nature, individually and socially. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 1. What is practical reason? Is it knowledge or a practical disposition? It is the capacity for engaging in the process of identifying reasons for action, namely, identifying what is objectively good and bad. It is a form of knowledge. And it does motivate, by definition. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 In developing an account of practical reason, the first problem we must address is this: Is practical reason both *practical* and *rational*? This problem has two aspects. First, if practical reason is really practical, then how is it rational? And if it is rational, how is it really practical? In other words, suppose that practical reasoning is by definition a kind of knowledge. Knowledge is theoretical, it aims to grasp what is true. So the first aspect of the problem is that theoretical knowledge cannot (by itself) motivate to action. Alternately, suppose that practical reason is by definition a kind of practical motivation or disposition to act in certain ways rather than others. Such motivations have action-guiding force and would explain why we act the way we do. The second aspect of the problem is that such dispositions are not forms of knowledge. So either practical reasoning is not *practical* (action-guiding) or it is not *reasonable*. In a very real sense, the primary challenge is to *defend the very concept of practical reason*. Even if we can answer these problems, others will surface. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
4. Is practical reasoning substantive or procedural? Is it end-directed or only means-directed? It is end-directed by definition. It aims at the good. The natural norm of reason is specific to pursuing the good. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 For example, practical reasoning is commonly supposed by some philosophers to be a means-oriented activity, not end-oriented. We reason about how to get what we desire or how to achieve our goals, but do not reason our way to our desires and goals themselves. We simply *have* desires and goals. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
5. Are moral reasons one type of practical reason? Philosophers are either dualists, monists, or pluralists about practical reason. I defend a pluralistic account.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
Another problem is the relation between two commonly recognized sorts of practical reasons: prudential and moral. [@chappell2013kalou] Are these really distinct? If so, what is the distinction? If not, is one a species of the other or are both species of another genus? In other words, do we help others because it is ultimately in our best interests (egoism) or do we help others because we can genuinely suppress our own interests (altruism)?\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
\
6. Is practical reasoning valuable, important, and objective? It is valuable, indispensable. And objective. It aims not at "values" but at practical reasons, goods that are to be pursued.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 A related problem is the status of practical reasons within (a broadly-construed) naturalism. Are such reasons objects in the world or objects, so to speak, "in our heads"? When I take it as a reason to buy my friend lunch because he just lost his job, how are we to understand the proposition "My friend just lost his job"? It is clearly descriptive fact or state of affairs, but it also seems to become something else when I take it as a reason for buying him lunch.   \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 8. Does practical reasoning make natural norms irrelevant \'97 since reflecting on natural norms makes them mere data in the rational reflective process, not determinate, binding norms. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Another problem is the "irrelevance objection" to neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism. Briefly, this objection states that "natural norms" specific to the human species may push us in a particular direction but that they cannot justify an action as moral because ethical reflection allows us to step back from such natural norms and decide against them. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 13. Is practical reason naturalistic? Yes, on an unrestricted conception of how to live. 
\b0 Or are reasons only "in here" in us, psychological and rational, in which case humans are not natural? Or are reasons for acting "out there" in the world, not physical and not natural, in which case nature is normative? If so, is this naturalism? Is this view objective idealism? Is practical reason natural?
\b \
\
7. Is practical reasoning intersubjective only, or also objective? It is intersubjective and objective. Is it like logic, response-independent, or like etiquette, response dependent? We reason within a tradition but traditions can be, as a whole, true or false, good or bad.  \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 The final set of problems pertains to practical reasoning in social groups or "traditions." It is an empirical datum that human beings develop their capacity to recognize practical reasons within a family and society with its own idiosyncratic political, religious, and philosophical worldview. So, quite plausibly, our initial de facto set of beliefs, desires, and dispositions reflect the substantive commitments of our group. But even if practical reasons are not easily reducible to response-dependent features of each individual reasoner, we still have to ask whether they are response-dependent features of practical-rationality-traditions or whether they answer to response-independent normative facts. \
\
 In other words, although there is one human nature, expressed variously in different cultures, languages, customs, and thoughts -- are we forced to give up on the idea of *one human rationality*, albeit expressed variously? Is there, at bottom, a plurality of *rationalities*? Is practical reason intersubjective, like etiquette? My case for this very difficult conclusion rests on the belief, virtually incorrigible, that practical reason is *important*. It is of unquestionable intrinsic value to human beings. Furthermore, insofar as virtue is relative to rationality, rationality itself must be fixed to preserve moral realism. A practical reason can and does motivate one, all by itself; in conjunction with or absent other immediate inclinations or desires. Practical reason, furthermore, motivates when one judges that a course of action or an outcome is good in itself, that it is *desirable* in the sense that it is to be desired whether one presently desires it or not.\
\
\
## Introduction to this chapter\
\
In developing an account of practical reason, there are two related problems we must address. Is practical reason both *practical* and *rational*? If practical reason is really practical, then how is it rational? And if it is rational, how is it really practical? In other words, suppose that practical reasoning is by definition a kind of knowledge. Knowledge is theoretical, it aims to grasp what is true. So the first problem is that theoretical knowledge cannot (by itself) motivate to action. Alternately, suppose that practical reason is by definition a kind of practical motivation or disposition to act in certain ways rather than others. Such motivations have action-guiding force and would explain why we act the way we do. The second problem is that such dispositions are not forms of knowledge. So either practical reasoning is not *practical* (action-guiding) or it is not *reasonable*. In a very real sense, the primary challenge is to *defend the very concept of practical reason*. Even if we can answer these problems, others will surface.  I will summarize and address each new problem as it arises.\
\
## Practical Reason and knowledge\
\
We can set up the discussion in this way: how should one live? McDowell says that the whole "point of engaging in ethical reflection\'85 lies in the interest of the question 'How should one live'?"[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] No mature adult can avoid asking this question. The answer or answers to the "how to live?" question(s) will be a *practical* answer or set of answers.  It will be an item of knowledge and also a plan or guide to living in the way specified by that knowledge. \
\
As a first pass, we use Jay Wallace's definition as a starting point: "Practical reason is the general human capacity for resolving, through reflection, the question of what one is to do."[@seppracticalreason] We engage in such practical reasoning about quite general matters ("how should one live?") and about more specific circumstances ("should I stay or should I go?") and everything in between. Practical reasoning taken broadly includes a variety of related deliberative processes, including considering future actions to be done, reflecting on past actions already done, evaluating events and objects as desirable or undesirable. What all these have in common is the the attempt to identify (or create) *practical reasons* -- that is, reasons to \uc0\u966  or not to \u966 . \
\
Practical reasoning is thus like theoretical reasoning in at least one important respect: it is normative. Theoretical reasoning is a process by which I aim to determine *what to believe*. When I assess evidence for and against some proposition P, I am looking for *reasons* to believe P is true or false. The successful conclusion of a rational argument is the judgment that P or that not-P. (Or I may not have enough evidence to judge either way, in which case I may withhold judgment.) Similarly, when I consider a scientific hypothesis, I suppose that P and then conduct an experiment that will reveal reasons that confirm or disconfirm the supposition. To fail to believe P upon coming to know good evidence for it, or to believe P in spite of good evidence against it, is to make an intellectual error. If Q entails P and I already know and affirm that Q, then I *ought* to affirm that P.  Similarly, if some reason to \uc0\u960  entails a reason to \u966 , and I already know and am committed to \u960 , then I ought to \u966 . \
\
My contention is that the linguistic parity between \uc0\u960 -type reasons and Q-type reasons is not accidental. Both are a species of *reasons*, though they differ. Philippa Foot says that reasons of type (A)\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 are  "Reasons for acting, which we may call practical reasons" and type (B) are "Reasons for believing, which we may call evidential or demonstrative reasons." She continues: \uc0\u8232 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
>A\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
s philosophers, and therefore theoreticians, our job is of course to 
\i give
\i0  the second type of reason, arguing for or against the truth of a variety of propositions that seem to involve special problems\'97like those, for instance, about personal identity or the existence of an external world. But among these many \'91philosophical\'92 subjects we find that of the nature of practical reasons, and in this special case we shall have to give reasons of type B for theses about reasons of type A.[@foot2001natural 64-5].\
\
The difference between the two kinds of reasons is not obliterated by noticing their essential parity.  Practical reasoning is essentially practical. We must be careful with our words; both theoretical and practical reasoning are *active* in the sense that both require work and both light up the brain on an MRI scan. But where theoretical reasoning results in belief, judgment, speculation, and so on, practical reasoning *results in action*. And, I would suggest, this distinction must be built in to our definition of practical reasoning. \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 (This point needs some defending, but for now I am only aiming to articulate it.)\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
One does not practically reason about what to do *and then decide* to do it; there is no gap between the conclusion of a deliberation and a decision. \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 To borrow Gibbard\'92s unforgettable phrasing, practical reasoning is \'93thinking how to live\'94.[@gibbard2009thinking] \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 To be a reasoner is to be responsive to Sellars' "space of reasons", including both practical and theoretical reasons.  The difference, as Jennifer Frey points out, is this that theoretical reasons give us good reason to believe what is true or false while practical reasons give us good reason to act or not act. She says:  \cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \'93The practical order is not essentially the order of reality and truth, but the order of action and the good. It is not the order of the explanation of form, but the order of the exemplification or realization of form.\'94[@frey 2]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Considering practical reason as a whole in this way helps us to understand the neo-Aristotelians. Jack Weinstein says: \'91The term practical rationality is derived from Aristotle\'92s *phronesis*. It is to be distinguished from *sophia*, a more technical form of reasoning. Practical rationality leads to more approximate conclusions; it takes context and relative facts into account, and it usually leads to moral or political conclusions.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 60-61] \
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
### McDowell practical reasoning as knowledge\
\
With these basics in hand, let us turn to John McDowell's argument for the old Socratic thesis that virtue is a kind of knowledge. \
\
The virtuous person, McDowell argues, knows what to do. Hence, virtue is a kind of practical knowledge.  For in many cases, \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 the answer to "how?" questions is an item of knowledge. "How do I unscrew a light bulb?" is a request for an instruction ("twist left") or set of instructions, ("first, grip the light bulb; then twist left until it comes loose.").  So McDowell argues that the virtues are various "sensitivities" to the salient facts about how to live. Virtue is a kind of knowledge, namely *practical knowledge* (a \'93disposition to act well\'94).  The answer to the question of how to live will be not just a proposition but a plan. \
\
To see why it makes sense to conceive of virtue as practical knowledge, suppose that some platitudinous value (say, kindness) is really a virtue. The kind person is reliably kind and is kind *on purpose*. A person who merely happens to be kind or who commits acts of kindness resulting from blind instinct does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. A person who is kind once, or even every now and then, likewise does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. Rather, a kind person is one who is regularly sensitive to a range of reasons for behaving in a particular way. The kind person, McDowell adduces, "has a reliable sensitivity to a certain sort of requirement which situations impose on behavior" and such "deliverances of a reliable sensitivity are cases of knowledge."[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] The kind person *knows* what is called for, is intentional about avoiding cruel or indifferent behavior, and so on. \
\
One inadequacy with this view is that there are a variety of reasons for action. Rather obviously, the question of what to do is in many cases not simply a question of what is kind, or fair, or just. McDowell has supported the notion that this kind of knowledge ("sensitivity to reasons") is necessary for virtue, but not that it is sufficient. For it might be that one is sensitive to what another would feel but still fail to act rightly. He gives the example of an overindulgent parent who is far *too* sensitive to the feelings of the child, or rather *not sensitive enough* to other considerations, like the considerations of fairness or child\'92s health. How does the moral knowledge that is virtue combine with other forms of knowledge or other motivations? \
\
He gives two answers:  the first is that the when a virtuous person is sensitive to the \'93requirement imposed by the situation" that requirement must exhaust his reason for acting as he does.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] It would disqualify the act as a candidate for an example of kindness if the agent performed it *because* it was kind *and because good repute was likely to follow*. If we run the same calculus on each particular virtue, we can hypothesize that virtuous agents\'92 behavior in each case is explained by their sensitivity to those particular kinds of reasons. In turn, their behavior in general (when virtuous) is explained by their sensitivity in general. He concludes: \
\
>Thus the particular virtues are not a batch of independent sensitivities. Rather, we use the concepts of the particular virtues to mark similarities and dissimilarities among the manifestations of a single sensitivity which is what virtue, in general, is: an ability to recognize requirements which situations impose on one's behavior. It is a single complex sensitivity of the sort which we are aiming to instill when we aim to inculcate a moral outlook.[@mcdowell1979virtue 333]\
\
In other words, the virtuous person is sensitive to a whole range of reasons; since reason A and reason B might commend different acts, part of virtue must be the meta-cognitive capacity to reflect upon all those reasons available to one, to rank and order them. \
\
## Is practical knowledge practical?\
\
This thesis that virtue as the sensitivity or set of sensitivities to requirements for action is not liable to persuade some. An objection familiarly attributed to Hume says that practical reasons by themselves cannot motivate, at least not by themselves. If this were so, moral reasons could not satisfy the "practical requirement". Expressivists are among the chief contemporary proponents of this objection. Expressivism is motivated in large part by the attempt to satisfy the *practical* dimension of practical reason (at the cost of the "rational" part). \
\
>Expressivism in this form suggests a naturalistic interpretation of practical reason, one that may seem appropriate to the enlightened commitments of the modern scientific world view. It is naturalistic metaphysically, insofar as it makes no commitment to the objective existence in the world of such allegedly questionable entities as values, norms, or reasons for action.[@seppracticalreason]\
\
On this familiar view, \'93cognition and volition are distinct.\'94 Practical reasoners do not simply enjoy  a \'93single complex sensitivity\'94 to what a situation requires; they also need the presence of a conative mental state (such as a desire) as well. In McDowell\'92s example, one is aware that one\'92s friend is in trouble and that the friend is able to be comforted (the cognitive bit) and a desire (or motivation or inclination or settled passion) for helping one\'92s friends (the non-cognitive bit). Surely these two *together* and neither in isolation explains the behavior. For suppose that two persons in the same situation are equipped with identical perceptual capacities and so sensitive to the same range of reasons for action, but only one of them does the right thing. If such a supposed situation were to obtain, it would disconfirm McDowell\'92s conclusion.\
\
McDowell's criticism of this objection is this: in order to even notice the salient facts (that one's friend is in trouble) one must already be sensitive to a particular range of requirements for action. The difference between the vicious and virtuous person lies not just in their desires and reactions to what they notice about the world but in the noticing itself. The morally calloused chauvinist does not notice the fact that his or her actions are causing others pain. Better, the calloused person does not notice it *as morally salient* fact. \
\
This response from McDowell is not conclusive, but it is a good start. For it highlights the deep fault line between the Humean and the Aristotelian camps. It is true that if two people are identically sensitive to a morally salient fact but act differently that virtue cannot simply be that sensitivity.  But one person's *modus ponens* is another's *modus tollens.* So if virtue is to be identified with a single complex sensitivity, then a supposed situation in which two persons perceive a situation and its practical requirements identically but act differently cannot obtain.[@mcdowell1979virtue 333] \
\
Is there anyway to bridge the divide without begging the question in either direction? McDowell suggests we look to Aristotle.  Aristotle allowed that \'93appreciation of what [a virtuous person] observes is clouded, or unfocused, by the impact of a desire to do otherwise.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 334] The point of such an allowances is that the break between the sensitivity to reasons (which is virtue) and a resultant wrong action occurs when other psychological factors interfere. What interference? McDowell mentions desires and also a \'93distortion in one\'92s appreciation\'94 of the relevant reasons.[@mcdowell1979virtue 334] \
\
This reply from McDowell is *an* answer but it too is not conclusive. For Donald Davidson argues to the effect that a person might fail to perform the resultant right action *even without such interfering factors.*McDowell responds that the point is true, but it is not an objection. Aristotle\'92s account of continence details that continence is not a virtue. Continence is better than incontinence, but not as good as virtue. The continent person is able to perform the right action because he recognizes it as right, *despite* countervailing pressures (from desires, say) to do the wrong action. Since a fully developed virtue definitionally includes having the proper motivation as well, continence is only needed in the absence of a fully developed virtue. Furthermore, the virtuous person is not always one who \'93balances\'94 reasons for X against countervailing reasons for Y. The virtuous person is the one for whom simply identifying a reason (\'93in this situation, courage requires that I run into danger\'94) silences countervailing reasons. The virtuous persons sees the danger (and perhaps feels rightly apprehensive) but also sees that courage in the face of this danger is required; the latter perception, according to McDowell, \'93silences\'94 other pressures.[@mcdowell1979virtue 335] The merely continent person has to \'93weigh\'94 reasons; the virtuous person fluently and instantly *acts* on the best reason.\
\
So McDowell's thesis is that virtue is a kind of knowledge, namely, a perceptual sensitivity to a range of facts that are conceptually defined as reasons for action. The hypothetical counterexample presented by his Humean critic is one wherein two agents are "sensitive to" or "notice" identical reasons for action but do not actually *act* identically. McDowell's response is that while noticing a requirement for action is necessarily motivating *to some extent*, other psychological factors may interfere with the resulting correct action. Nevertheless, the case is not yet settled. \
\
## A second pass at knowledge\
\
Making the case more plausible requires a second, deeper look at reasoning in general. Before I offer my response, I need to take this second look. The paradigmatic case of knowledge is theoretical knowledge, knowledge that P. But theoretical knowledge is deductive, categorical, and propositional. Deductive logic examines and codifies the necessary relations that obtain between such propositions.  So one objection states that if virtue is knowledge, and the paradigmatic kind of knowledge codifiable, then it would seem to be necessary that virtue knowledge is codifiable. However, practical knowledge or \'91knowing-what-to-do\'92 is not codifiable. Therefore, virtue must not be knowledge. (The non-cognitivist critic also assumes this deductive model of practical reasoning.) \
\
The problem with this objection, McDowell thinks, is not so much a problem with our moral theory but a problem with our conception of rationality. The problem stems from a \'93deep-rooted prejudice\'94 that rationality is a rule-following procedure. If rationality is a rule-following procedure, then it follows that *either* practical rationality and morality are likewise rule-following procedures *or* that practical rationality and morality is not, ultimately, sufficiently *rational*.  Some philosophers (often followers of Hume but not necessarily Hume himself) think that morality is a not rational domain but a domain of sentiments, desires, commitments, approvals, and so on. Other philosophers (often followers of Kant) think that morality is a rational domain and hence must be a matter of identifying first principles and \'93applying\'94 them to particular situations. But what they share in common is a belief that \'93rationality must be explicable in terms of being guided by a formulable universal principle.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] This common belief McDowell wishes to refute. MacIntyre, similarly,  denies the assumption that normative ethical rules can be derived from universal ethical principles the way we \'93apply\'94 universal logical truths to particular logical conclusions via a middle term.[@macintyre1984does.]\
\
McDowell\'92s discussion here (drawing on Wittgenstein and others) is hard to follow. The point seems to be that even apparently obvious cases where the rational thing to do is to follow an objective rule (say, by extending a series of numbers) turn out to be cases of a much messier process in which there is no such objective rule by appeal to which we can explain rational thoughts or behaviors. If Bob instructs Charlie to \'93add 2\'94 to a number and continue applying the rule indefinitely, we tend to be confident Charlie will produce \'932, 4, 6, 8,\'94 etc., which will \'93churn out the appropriate behavior with the sort of reliability which a physical mechanism, say a piece of clockwork, might have.\'94 We postulate a \'93psychological mechanism, underlying his behavior, by an inference analogous to that whereby one might hypothesize a physical structure underlying the observable motions of some inanimate object.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] The \'93ground and nature of our confidence\'94 that we will reliably apply rules is not but a common form of life. The \'91form of life\'92 is a term of art here from Wittgenstein (and quoted with approval from Stanley Cavell) that refers to that difficult-to-define process by which we learn how reliably to use words in our native language, how to make exclamations like a pained \'93ow!\'94 or an excited \'93ooh!\'94, when to laugh at jokes, and when to cry in pity. Our shared rationality, McDowell suggests, is not grounded in \'93external\'94 objective rules but in a shared form of life or what he calls a \'93congruence of subjectivities\'94.[@mcdowell1979virtue 339] McDowell admits this is a disconcerting hypothesis; it induces \'93vertigo.\'94 But, our response to such vertigo should not be to embrace a \'93consoling myth\'94. That myth he says is the two notions that (a) rule-following is a psychological mechanism that \'97 absent mistakes \'97 guarantees consistency, and that there exist objective facts of the matter over and above the congruence of subjectivities. If we abandon these two notions and embrace the model of deductive rationality as grounded only in our intersubjective form of life, then the corresponding model of practical rationality will become tenable. \
\
Although McDowell argues that virtue is not codifiable, still it is a kind of knowledge. But if virtue knowledge is not codifiable then how is it *consistent*? What guarantees that the moral person\'92s behavior is intelligibly the same from case to case? On the one hand, if moral knowledge is rational then it is consistent from case to case and situation to situation; but if, as McDowell has been arguing, both deductive reasoning and practical reasoning are not merely consistent by being like a rule-following machine or computer, how do we explain the virtuous person's reliably correct behavior? Section 5 of the article answers this question by way of Aristotle's practical syllogisms.\
\
The 'practical syllogism' takes the following shape: \
\
1. X is good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. (E.g., it is good to instantiate justice in the classroom).\
2. Z would be X. (E.g., giving everyone a chance to re-take a quiz that was unavailable due to technical problems would be instantiate justice in my classroom.)\
3. Therefore, Z would be good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. \
\
On the strictly deductive logical model, the role of the major premise is to provide rock solid universal ethical principles from which to derive particular moral duties. But McDowell resists this model. On the strictly non-cognitivist model, without universal ethical principles we are left with universal psychological states (consistent desires, plans, values, or norms). McDowell also resists this. On the non-codifiable model, what does the major premise do? Its role, he says, is to state a "certain conception of how to live... [namely] the *virtuous person's conception* of the sort of life a human being should lead."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343. Emphasis added.] It is clear upon reflection that this account is a sort of circular reasoning. For the virtuous person's conception of how to live is itself conditioned by what he called earlier 'the moral outlook'. That conception of how to live, in turn, conditions what particular saliences are noticed (what minor premises) and generates practical conclusions about what is to be done. What kind of life should a human being lead? The answer "cannot be definitively written down."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] Furthermore, "Any attempt to capture it in words will recapitulate the character of the teaching whereby it might be instilled: generalizations will be approximate at best..."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] The upshot of the combination of non-codifiability with a practical syllogistic form is that the virtuous person takes for a rule of life some conception of how to live but that this conception is part of what it means to be a virtuous person. (Hence the vertigo.)\
\
We might wonder why we are bothering about formal syllogistic reasoning at this point. But this way of understanding the practical syllogism *does* do good job of providing a plausible explanation of moral motivation (reasons one might act in some way) and moral behavior (reasons one acted that way). To paraphrase McDowell: "Explanations of judgments about what to do are explanations of actions."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342. Verbatim, he says: "The explanations, so far treated as explanations of judgments about what to do, are equally explanations of actions."] I can explain your behavior by understanding that you were concerned for your friend\'92s welfare and reached out to help. Likewise, you can explain your decision to help by assuring me that you are concerned for your friend\'92s welfare. For McDowell, the general structure of the practical syllogism is useful. He says \'93the rationality of virtue\'85 is not demonstrable from an external standpoint.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 346]\
\
## Why do we do anything? \
\
This discussion from McDowell is helpful but leaves much to be desired. McDowell argued that the virtuous person is not only sensitive to one kind of requirement (say, kindness) but sensitive to a wide range of reasons that must be ranked, ordered, and weighed before he or she can act on the practical conclusion. It is necessary to broaden the notion of perceptual sensitivity. However, he also assumed that "moral reasons" is a name for the overriding sort of practical reasons. I wish to argue that this is a subtle mistake. \
\
In order to supply some of what is missing, what is required is a step back to examine the natural of practical reasons themselves and how they relate to practical reasoning in general. I would like to argue that there is one genus of reasons for action: practical reasons. There are many species of practical reason, but proper distinction is not between "moral" and "non-moral" but between various kinds of moral reasons. \
\
 The familiar way of framing the "how should one live?" question is this: There are two sorts of motives that drive everyone: prudential reasons and moral reasons. Prudential reasons incline one to look out for oneself. One is naturally, selfishly inclined to pursue one's own happiness or well-being.  On the other hand, moral reasons drive one to look out for others. One is morally constrained to do one's duty, sometimes in accord with, but often against one's inclinations. Kant (or the stereotypical figure in the literature whom people call "Kant") presents morality as a particular set of reasons (all deriving from the moral law) that obligate one to do what is right, whether or not it is prudential. Otherwise, so long as one is doing one's duty, one can answer the "how should one live?" question with a list of prudential considerations: get a good job, save for retirement, eat healthy foods, exercise, make friends, and so on.\
\
Within this familiar frame, morality becomes especially pressing at the moment of moral dilemmas. Edmund Pincoffs distinguishes two broad conceptions of philosophical ethics he calls \'93Quandary Ethics\'94 and \'93Character Ethics.\'94 Quandary ethics is focused on the short-term resolution of immediate moral problems, either by dissolving moral perplexity or giving some (hopefully rational) basis for a particular decision or course of action. The Quandary ethicists are those Pincoffs quotes at the beginning of his article (such as Hare, Toulon, Brandt). They think that:\
\
>The business of ethics is to clarify and solve "problems", i.e. situations in which it is difficult to know what one should do; that the ultimate beneficiary of ethical analysis is the person who, in one of these situations, seeks rational ground for the decision he must make; that ethics is therefore primarily concerned to find such grounds, often conceived of as moral rules and the principles from which they can be derived; and that meta-ethics consists in the analysis of the terms, claims, and arguments which come into play in moral disputation, deliberation, and justification in problematic contexts.[@pincoffs1971quandary 552. Cf. @macintyre1984does] \
\
Like the Quandary ethicist, McDowell represents the view of moral reasons as special, perhaps overriding, kinds of reasons pertaining to the rights, obligations, or duties of one individual in relation to others. Even in asking the "how do I live?" question, a Quandary ethicist is likely assuming that the answer will include a set of moral reasons weighed against or in opposition to non-moral reasons (such as prudential reasons). \
\
But are moral reasons are *one type* of practical reason, or does any practical reason count as a "moral" reason (broadly construed)?[@foot2002virtues chapter 13, "Are Moral Reasons Overriding?"; Cf. also @mcdowell1978moral] Suppose a greeting card or an internet meme recommends that you "live well, love hard, and laugh often." Is this platitude aiming to provide you with a moral reason, a practical reason, a prudential reason, an aesthetic reason, or something else?\
\
By contrast, character ethics is focused on the long-term goal of living well by executing worthwhile goals in every day life.  Aristotle is an example of a Character Ethicist. Aristotle:\
\
>...thought of ethics as a branch of politics, which in turn he thought of as a very wide-ranging subject having to do generally with the planning of human life so that it could be lived as well as possible. Moral problems are given their due but are by no means stage-centre. The question is not so much how we should resolve perplexities as how we should live.[@pincoffs1971quandary 553-4] \
\
As Martha Nussbaum points out, a Quandary ethicist might ask \'93how do specifically moral ends and commitments figure among the ends that [a moral agent] pursues?\'94 Nussbaum clarifies:\
\
>This question is posed in a characteristically modern way, presupposing a distinction between the moral and the non-moral that is not drawn, as such, by the Greek thinkers. But if one objects to that characterization, one can rephrase it: for example, What role does concern for others for their own sake play in here scheme of ends? What role does political justice play in her scheme of ends? And so forth.\'94[@nussbaum1999virtue 174] \
\
McDowell is trying to straddle the line between the two ways the Quandary and the Character ethicist thinks about practical reasons. What is needed is distinguish our sense of 'moral' from the older sense. Foot makes a similar point: \
\
>Many if not most moral philosophers in modern times see their subject as having to do exclusively with relations between individuals or between an individual and society, and so with such things as obligations, duties, and charitable acts... \'91moral\'92 and \'91prudential\'92 considerations [are] contrasted in a way that was alien to Plato or Aristotle.[@foot2001natural 68] \
\
Certainly considerations about myself are conceptually distinct from considerations about my family, my friend, my society, or my species. And certainly there is a powerful social and psychological force to the distinction between moral and prudential, other-regarding and self-regarding,[@slote1995agent] altruistic and egoistic[@nagel1978possibility], benevolent and selfish, conscience and self-love.[@annas2009egoism; @macintyre1967egoism; @bloomfield2012eudaimonia; @huang2010self]  But getting the distinction right is crucial to understanding the kind of knowledge that virtue is. \
\
MacIntyre's earliest ethical work distinguished the significance of moral judgments compared to other kinds of judgments. In a careful critique of both intuitionists such as Moore and emotivists such as Stevenson, MacIntyre concluded that both (mistakenly) assume that moral judgments and moral terms have significance only in their referential meaning. The intuitionists, of course, concluded that moral terms refer to a non-natural property, while the emotivists concluded that moral terms do not refer to such a property and so do not refer at all. (Naturalists, later in the 20th century, argue that moral terms refer to natural properties.) MacIntyre\'92s alternative denies the assumption entirely; moral judgments \'93have their own kind of logic\'94 and their significance, like other kinds of judgments, comes from \'93exhibiting the logic of their usage.\'94[@murphy2003macintyre 118, quoting p. 73 of MacIntyre\'92s master\'92s thesis *The Significance of Moral Judgments*] The significance of moral judgments is that \'93they enable us to solve problems of appraisal and of action.\'94 Solving problems of evaluation (we might say) and action is their place in \'93a pattern of language and action\'85\'94 He continues: \
\
>Above all they arise out of the way in which we see the world and the way in which our language allows us to see the world. We cannot sufficiently emphasize the direction given to our appraisals by the language which happens to be available for our descriptions. It is as we see the facts that we judge the world.\
\
MacIntyre\'92s point is that moral judgments are not *simply* useful in moral dilemmas or quandaries. They appear, at the earliest stages of childhood development, in a pattern of usage that is inextricable from the human activities of reasoning, acting, and appraising. Evaluative judgments appear in the widest imaginable spread of human activities, from politics to playgrounds, from sociology to social life, from the practices of law and medicine to the professions of journalism and psychology, from the sciences to the arts. Even if this point be granted, moral dilemmas are not *unreal*. Moral dilemmas are a special version of our general \'93problems of appraisal and action.\'94 They may be particularly vexing, but they are no different from the general problems of how to live, how to be happy, what kinds of public policies to pursue, what apparently meaningful types of life are really meaningful. \
\
\
### History of error\
\
To make this case, it is helpful to examine how historically we came to make the familiar, but faulty, distinction between moral and non-moral reasons. Foot cites Mill as an early proponent of the distinction: \
\
>J. S. Mill, for instance, expresses this modern point of view quite explicitly, saying in his essay *On Liberty* that \'91A person who shows rashness, obstinacy, self\uc0\u8208 conceit .\'a0.\'a0. who cannot restrain himself from harmful indulgences\'92 shows faults (Mill calls them \'91self\u8208 regarding faults\'92) which \'91are not properly immoralities\'92 and while they \'91may be proofs of any amount of folly .\'a0.\'a0. are only a subject of moral reprobation when they involve a breach of duty to others, for whose sake the individual is bound to have care for himself\'92.[@foot2001natural 68]\
\
Mill distinguishes folly from immorality, where folly is failure to provide goods for oneself.  As Elizabeth Anscombe had observed in 1958, the distinction between moral and non-moral *reasons* shows up in a similar distinction between two different kinds of 'ought' or 'should', or 'need': \
\
>The terms \'93should\'94 or \'93ought\'94 or \'93needs\'94 relate to good and bad: e.g. machinery needs oil, or should or ought to be oiled, in that running without oil is bad for it, or it runs badly without oil. According to this conception, of course, "should" and "ought" are not used in a special "moral" sense when one says that a man should not bilk. (In Aristotle's sense of the term "moral" [\uc0\u942 \u952 \u953 \u954 \u972 \u962 ], they are being used in connection with a moral subject\u8209 matter: namely that of human passions and [non\u8209 technical] actions.) But they have now acquired a special so\u8209 called "moral" sense-\u8209 i.e. a sense in which they imply some absolute verdict (like one of guilty/not guilty on a man) on what is described in the "ought" sentences used in certain types of context: not merely the contexts that Aristotle would call "moral"\u8209 -passions and actions\u8209 -but also some of the contexts that he would call "intellectual.\'94[@anscombe1958]\
\
The peculiarly *moral* 'ought' means came to mean a final, verdictive ought -- like the kind of "thou shalt" language used in the Ten Commandments. But *this* kind of ought, Anscombe thinks, only makes sense in the mouth of a believer in divine law. \
\
This conceptual history illuminates that moral and non-moral reasons each exemplify, in their own ways, a broader conceptual structure of practicality. We identify *reasons to act*.  MacIntyre further summarizes the conceptual roots of the terms 'moral' and 'ethical'.\
\
>'Moral\'92 is the etymological descendant of \'91moralis\'92. But \'91moralis\'92, like its Greek predecessor *ethikos* --  Cicero invented \'91moralis\'92 to translate the Greek word in the *De Fato* -- means \'91pertaining to character\'92 where a man\'92s character is nothing other than his set dispositions to behave systematically in one way rather than another, to lead on particular kind of life... The early uses of 'moral' did not contrast with \'93\'91prudential\'92 or \'91self interested\'92\'94 nor with \'93\'91legal or \'91religious\'92... The word to which it is closest in meaning is perhaps most simply \'91practical\'92.\'94[@macintyre1984after 38] \
\
This point is not merely of historical or etymological interest (though of course, the narrow sense of the word 'moral' in discourse today is clear enough). The point is that  qualities such as benevolence and generosity we tend to call human \'93moral goodness\'94 are of a type with a *broader category of goodness*.  Foot explains: \'93I want to show that judgments usually considered to be the special subject of moral philosophy should really be seen as belonging to a wider class of evaluations of conduct with which they share a common conceptual structure.\'94 [@foot2001natural 66-67] \
\
### The upshot: Practical reason as substantive process willing the good\
\
Let us return to McDowell's response to the Humean critic who is not satisfied that moral reasons are intrinsically motivating. McDowell admitted that the virtuous person is not just sensitive to one or two sorts of requirement for action as final verdicts; the virtuous person is sensitive to the broad range of often competing reasons that must be ranked and weighed before a final verdict is reached about what is to be done. This move was correct, in my view. What was incorrect was the persistence in labeling the broader sensitivity as "virtue", which suggests that one is only considering "moral reasons" in the narrower sense of that term. This subtle mistake leaves McDowell's case open to the hypothetical counterexample that an immoral person might be sensitive to a wide range of reasons, including narrowly "moral" reasons (read as one's duty to others), while doing the wrong thing or doing nothing at all. \
\
How can we fill in the gaps in his account? The alternative that is needed is to recapture the holistic view of practical reasoning as the activity that defines human life form. Gladly, this account of practical reason is plausible in its own right and reinforces what we have argued above about the generics that describe all organisms and human beings. For help, I will turn to Jennifer Frey's recent discussions of Anscombe and Aquinas. In short, I shall defend the Aristotelian-Thomistic account in which practical reasoning is an end-oriented activity that aims at the perceived good of one's form of life.  As Frey stated in the epigram above, "There could be no reasons unless a rational animal has a general conception of its own good, and thus a general sense of how to live." \
\
The first point in this case is that all organisms act toward ends, albeit unreflectively.  Frey summarizes Aquinas in this way: \
\
>\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
all living things are a self-sustaining system of powers that functions to bring the living thing into being and to sustain its being. The movement of any part of a living thing, at any particular moment, is necessarily explained by reference to the movement of the whole thing towards a single end: the coming to be, maintenance, or reproduction of 
\i that very form of life
\i0 .[@frey 68] \
\
We have argued above that the growth into maturity of an organism is growth into the exemplification of its form of life. This form of life is what Aquinas calls a thing's nature. Hence, a wolf hunts in packs by nature, trees extend roots into the ground by nature, reptiles warm themselves in the sun by nature, and so on. \
\
In plants and animals, the "natural inclination" toward their good is not reflective or intentional, and Aquinas did not make this mistake. Frey says:\
\
"Aquinas would agree with us that it is a category mistake to say that a sunflower 
\i wants 
\i0 to grow towards the light, if by this we mean that the flower somehow registers a positive feeling or has an inner impression towards the light, which \'93causes\'94 it to move toward the light. The plant does not apprehend or desire anything; thus Aquinas is very careful to say that it does not have a 
\i power 
\i0 of appetite. In fact, Aquinas is at pains to note that a plant has no window onto the world at all\'97it just has conditions in which it characteristically comes into being, maintains, and reproduces itself.[@frey 69-70]\
\
Plants merely grow and reproduce; while animals grow, reproduce, and enjoy conscious experiences, such as sensory perceptions of material objects and of their own hungers, thirsts, pains, and so on. When it comes to human beings, however, we observe a difference. \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Human beings grow, reproduce, and enjoy conscious experiences like other animals but human beings also *know* that they do so. To quote John Haldane again,  "things are specified by their power."[@haldane1998return 262] And we observe our "power" or capacity to engage in cognitive and deliberative activities. Simply put, we are able to reason, to reason theoretically and practically.\
\
Reasoning is a distinctly human activity. While animals can not only sense but *perceive*, humans have the capacity of "intellection," the power of abstracting the forms themselves from percepts. An animal can *sense* an informed, organized object; an animal can be affected by the object. But the human animal can *acquire information* from the organized object. The ability to perceive something *as*, or even to perceive something big and brown with a smudge on its nose, does not imply the ability to perceive that thing as a cat.[@haldane1996coming]\
\
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
When it comes to inclination or "appetite", animals pursue and avoid objects. The antelope pursues healthy grass and flees a lion. The animal can only experience what is good or bad for it as a particular object. \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Animals incline toward their own good. They also have sensory perception of beings. But animals do not perceive beings *as* falling under universal categories. \
 \
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
By contrast, a human being can recognize universals and hence can take up its natural inclinations to pursue or flee as reasons in a deliberative act. The natural inclinations may be underwritten or overridden. Confronted with a bit of healthy food on someone else's plat, I may choose not to eat it, for I recognize it as *not mine*. Confronted with a lion in a zoo, I may choose not to flee, for I recognize it as *not dangerous*. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Frey summarizes: \
>Rational animals, like any animal, have a natural inclination towards their good as a whole, and like lower animals this power is actualized through their apprehension of things in the world. But Aquinas argues that a rational animal relates to the world through the application of universal concepts, and thus it is inclined to pursue or avoid things under an intellectual, universal apprehension of them. Thus, Aquinas says that the will is inclined towards its objects under the formality of the \'93universal good,\'94 rather than the particular good.[@frey 75]\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 ### How to live\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
We have been speaking of the human capacity for recognizing and pursuing particular ends as good. We need to expand our scope to include the whole of life, the conception of our human good that constitutes the answer to the question "how should one live?" McDowell gets this part right \'97 every rational practice is undertaking in pursuit of some particular end *in context* of a total conception of what is good in general. Frey says: \
\
>Consequently, we can say that rational animals have an understanding of different levels of ends, and at least a vague sense of how they are supposed to hang together as a whole. This conception of how it all hangs together is what Aquinas calls the ultimate end\'97a rational animal\'92s general, conceptual understanding of how to live or go on. Aquinas thinks that any sane, mature adult will necessarily have cobbled together some such conception. Aquinas calls this conception \'93the universal good\'94, and he argues that it is the will\'92s proper object. Everything that is willed is willed under this rational aspect of good, as to be pursued because *in accord with my general conception of the good.* In fact, Aquinas thinks there could be no reasons unless a rational animal has a general conception of its own good, and thus a general sense of how to live. [@frey 78-9, italics in original.]\
\
Again:  \
>no human action is intelligible without attributing to the agent herself some conception of this end, no matter how inarticulate, unsystematic, or unreflective it might be. Aquinas takes it for granted that in coming to be a human being\'97i.e., being raised in a community of other human beings, coming into the possession of concepts, a language, and coming to have a world\'97one comes into some such conception, and thus comes to act voluntarily.[@frey 87] \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
### Substantive and procedural\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Some philosophers object to this "substantive" conception of practical reason. They think that practical reasoning is "procedural".[For a discussion of this distinction, see: @hooker2004procedural.] This objection misses the point. What we are presenting is the intelligible structure that the procedure must necessarily have. The "substance" I am defended is not a specific good or set of goods. It is highly general. The point is that without a sufficiently general starting point such as "good is to be done and evil avoided", no other procedural reasoning can get off the ground. \
\
Foot is persuaded that we must assume a definition of practical reasoning that is substantive, rather than merely procedural. Practical reasoning does not just aim at means to ends, nor does it merely aim at "ends"; it aims at *the apparent good*. \
\
>This now seems to me to be the correct way of meeting the challenge that I myself issued in \'91Morality as a System of Hypothetical Imperatives\'92 and at that time despaired of meeting: namely, to show the rationality of acting, even against desire and self\uc0\u8208 interest, on a demand of morality. The argument depends on the change of direction that Quinn suggested: seeing goodness as setting a necessary condition of practical rationality and therefore as at least a part\u8208 determinant of the thing itself. Nor is this a quite unfamiliar way of arguing. Many of us are willing to reject a \'91present desire\'92 theory of reasons for action because we think that someone who knowingly puts his future health at risk for a trivial pleasure is behaving foolishly, and therefore not well. Seeing his will as defective, we therefore say that he is doing what he has reason not to do. Being unable to fit the supposed \'91reason\'92 into some preconceived present\u8208 desire\u8208 based theory of reasons for action, we do not query whether it really is a foolish way to behave, but rather hang on to the evaluation and shape our theory of reasons accordingly. And it is exactly a generalization of this presumption about the direction of the argument on which I am now insisting. For what, we may ask, is so special about prudence that it alone among the virtues should be reasonably thought to relate to practical rationality in such a way? [@foot2001natural 63]\
\
If goodness is a "necessary condition of practical rationality" then we are already committed to a substantive view of practical reason, rather than a merely procedural neo-Humean view. \
\
### Evil? \
\
Some will object to the notion that practical reason is definitionally the knowledge of ends as good. Doesn't this just define away immoral acts, immoral motives, and immoral ends? Not at all. But the objection calls for an important clarification.\
\
To be practically rational is to judge the good, just as to be rational is to judge true and false. But the process must start somewhere. Aquinas points out that the first thing rational beings apprehend is simply "existence" or "being." Infants perceive beings and, eventually, naturally come to perceive objects *as* objects, as individual objects. \
\
Likewise, the first thing practical rational animals like us apprehend is "good." We are not here defining "good" as a special moral property but simply as the general property of desirableness.\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Aquinas says:\
\
>Now as "being" is the first thing that falls under the apprehension simply, so "good" is the first thing that falls under the apprehension of the practical reason, which is directed to action: since every agent acts for an end under the aspect of good. Consequently the first principle of practical reason is one founded on the notion of good, viz. that "good is that which all things seek after." Hence this is the first precept of practical reason, that "good is to be done and pursued, and evil is to be avoided."[@aquinas IIa. Q.94. Art. 2]\
\
The use of 'good' here, it bears repeating, not a special moral sense of good. Rather, it is the conception of an object of inclination, that which is to be pursued. Without such a general principle, practical reasoning and rational practice are unintelligible. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 Given this basic and abstract formulation of the structure of practical reasoning, we can further specify good ends.  Just as the basic structure of reasoning begins with the apprehension of being in general and then on to particular beings, concepts, and categories, practical reason begins with the apprehension of good in general and then determines particular goods.  \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >Practical reason is the movement of thought towards, rather than away from, material particulars\'85. practical reasoning is a movement from general knowledge of what is good and how to live, towards the production of the kind of life that is essentially characterized by such knowledge. When it is done well, what is understood is the same as what is produced: human form or human life.[@frey 2]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
Such basic goods are apprehended as contributing to a distinctively human life form. \
\
>\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
For practical reason, the starting points are the most primitive human goods that the will is naturally inclined to seek: life, knowledge, family, friendship, play, political community, and so on. These are the ends that all human beings want for their own sake, as intrinsically valuable to them. And they want these things in a rational way\'97viz., because they have a conceptual apprehension that they are constitutive of their general good.[@frey 88]\
\
Immoral acts, on this view, are rational mistakes. The immoral person is pursuing *something* and so in this sense is practically rational, since to be practical rational necessarily means to pursue something *as good*, as desirable. But the immoral person fails in their practical reasoning to correctly rank and order specific goods. The imprudent person, for example, judges that it would be better to eat, drink, and be merry today rather than plan to avoid future ills. The cruel person judges that it would be better to cause suffering than to be kind. \
\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
### Remedying McDowell's account\
\
The upshot of these reflections is this: \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 If a person does anything at all, then that person is engaging in practical reasoning. The "final verdict" and the verdictive ought is simply what Foot calls the thing to do "all things considered."[@foot2001natural 57] Apparent counterexamples that one might furnish to disprove the point actually serve, with sufficient clarification, to reinforce it. For example, someone might say, "It's ridiculous to think that I always pursue the good, because I sometimes do wrong." Sometimes we do the wrong thing. The proper response is that we perceive the bad as the good. Someone might say, "But sometimes I perceive the bad *as bad* and pursue it anyway." The response is that we sometimes take a bad or dismotivating reason into an overall reason to do something, all things considered.\
\
What motivational internalism gets right is the affirmation that one necessarily acts on what one judges is the thing to do. The motivational internalist urges that any practical reasons "out there" that are practical reasons *for me* necessarily connect up with my motivational structure.[@williams2007internal] Defined widely enough, I can agree to this way of stating things. If by "my motivational structure" we simply mean my overall disposition toward the good. I am oriented to pursue good things, and avoid bad things. Whatever may appear to me to fall under the description of 'good' I will, ipso facto, be oriented toward (whether I pursue it or merely approve of it and admire it). Whatever may appear to me to fall under the description 'bad' I will, ipso facto, oriented away from it (whether I avoid it or merely disapprove of it). \
\
What motivational externalism gets right, that there are reasons "out there" that *would* motivate one if one knew about them. There might be reasons to \uc0\u966  that I am not aware of and thus am not motivated by. For example, perhaps it is true that one ought to save for retirement, but I may fail to do so because I am unaware of that reason or am ignoring it in my attention to other reasons. \
\
It seems to me that a good deal of the internalism/externalism literature is consumed in disambiguating these unhelpful labels. The mare's nest, as I have shown above, is due to the fatal ambiguity of the phrase 'moral reasons'. In the Quandary ethicist's sense, moral reasons (i.e., facts about what is good for others) are simply one type of practical reason; but in the proper sense sense, *any* practical reason (i.e., objective normative and evaluative facts about what is worth pursuing and worth avoiding) can be seen as a "moral reason". To avoid this mess, a safer and clearer strategy is simply to recapture the insight that the concept of a practical reason is the concept of *what to do* all things considered. The thing to do all things considered has its "practical" or motivational component "built-in" so to speak. While it often happens that one's practical reasons conflict or are indeterminate, nevertheless, a set of practical reasons can constitute the *overriding* practical reason: *the thing to do*, all things considered. So, the final or verdictive ought belongs only to the ought that is the conclusion of the total process of practical reasoning. \
\
Seen in this light, it is obvious that practical reasons can and do motivate us. Or rather, practical reasons *are the only thing that motivate*. Practical reasons are the *primary* meaning of the term 'motive'. Other psychological states such as hungers, thirsts, loves, fears, *move* me to action the same way that such states move non-rational organisms. For rational animals, only reasons *motivate* me to act, since motivation is (I argue) a fundamentally rational state.  Aquinas distinguishes between the "actions of a human" and "human actions." The action of a human is any motion, such as mumbling in your sleep, scratching an itch, or idly tapping a foot. But a human action is by definition an action in pursuit of a goal which is perceived as a good. A human being without any practical reasons would not do immoral deeds; he or she would not do anything at all. Like Melville's Bartleby the Scrivener, the person who does not engage in practical reasoning or identify any practical reasons would simply waste away and die.[@melville1966bartleby] \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 ### reasoning about ends\
\
Reasoning about ends may be a difficult and messy business. But we do it. It is an empirical fact that we reason -- indeed, disagree and debate -- about ultimate ends. Suppose Betty says to her friend, "I'm concerned about you. You haven't returned my calls. I heard you lost your job and your spouse left. Now I see you're gaining weight. What's wrong?" It would be no consolation for her friend to respond, "Nothing's wrong. Yes, yes, all that is true: I'm destitute, alone, and unhealthy. But that's what I was *aiming* for." Betty would rightly think, "Well, then... you are a fool." Betty would rightly wonder "what is wrong such that you have taken as your aims such unhealthy and ridiculous goals?"\
\
Jay Wallace rebuts the charge that if reasoning about ends is not a mathematically-precise procedure, then it must not really be rational: \
\
>Practical deliberation about ends is not an easy or well-defined activity. There are no straightforward criteria for success in this kind of reflection, and it is often unclear when it has been brought to a satisfactory conclusion. These considerations encourage the Humean assumption\'97especially widespread in the social sciences\'97that there is no reasoning about final ends. On the other hand, how is one supposed to clarify one's largest and most important ends, if not by reasoning about them in some way? Rather than exclude such reflection because it does not conform to a narrowly scientific paradigm of reason, perhaps we should expand our conception of practical reason to make room for clarificatory reflection about the ends of action.[@seppracticalreason, section 6]\
\
Warren Quinn, likewise argues that we reason about goods: \
\
>Practical thought, like any other thought, requires a subject matter.  And for human beings the subject matter that distinguishes thought as practical is, in the first instance, human ends and action insofar as they are good or bad in themselves [\'85] practical thought deploys a master set of non-instrumental evaluative notions:  that of a good or bad human act, a good or bad human life, a good or bad human agent, and a good or bad human action.  Practical reason is, on this view, the faculty that applies these fundamental evaluative concepts.[@quinn1994 223]\
\
There are many reasons for action. But the concept of a reason for action is the concept of pursuing what is good or what is best, all things considered. Practical reason runs into quandaries because there are so many reasons for action, and they sometimes conflict.  Some have to do with what is best for me, what is best for others, what is best for me and what is best for me later, what is permissible and what is required, etc. Although we may want to reserve the word 'moral' for other-regarding reasons, it is important to keep in mind that our goal of living well demands sensitivity to a whole range of reasons, regarding self, other, world, and so on. \
\
Although this process is messy, it is fundamentally so. Any attempt to configure the process by subjecting to a set of ready-made rules or criteria will make it easier to understand only at the cost of losing grasp of the process. Wiggins suggests that there are psychological, not philosophical, reasons behind the attempt to reduce the process of practical reasoning to something mathematical and formal: \
 \
>I entertain the unfriendly suspicion that those who feel they *must* seek more than  [the Aristotelian view of practical reason] provides want a scientific theory of rationality not so much for a passion for science, even where there can be no science, but because they hope and desire, by some conceptual alchemy, to turn such a theory into a regulative or normative discipline, or into a system of rules by which to spare themselves some of the agony of thinking and all the torment of feeling and understanding that is actually involved in reasoned deliberation.[@wiggins1975deliberation]\
\
\
### Virtue as skill \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 Julia Annas\'92 presentation of virtue as as a skill illuminates this same point, I think, beautifully. She says, "I should develop an account of virtue in which I show have central to the idea that the practical reasoning of the virtuous person is analogous in important ways\'85 to the practical reasoning of someone who's exercising a practical skill.\'94[@annas2011intelligent 3] What she calls the \'93skill analogy\'94 might be taken as problematic since it drains the peculiarly *moral* quality out of virtue. The opposite is true: The skill analogy fills the project of living daily life with the potential for virtue. The virtuous person is *good at* and not just *good* \'97 good at helping others, good at thinking ahead, good at human life. The vicious person, by contrast, is not just bad but *bad at* the essential elements of human life. Of course, being born with a paucity of natural talents is not a matter of immorality or is being born with an abundance of natural talents a matter of moral worth. Rather, the admirable person makes *good use* of his or her fortune, and the despicable person makes bad use of it. The admirable person is all the more admirable when he or she proves skillful of making good use even of very bad fortune; and the miserable person is all the more pitiable when he or she wastes even of very good fortune. \
\
\
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
### Conclusion\
\
This chapter has attempted to secure a definition of practical reason which captures both the *practicality* and *rationality* of our human capacity to resolve what to do and how to live. I argued, with McDowell, that the virtuous person is sensitive to practical reasons, i.e., the salient facts of what is required in a given situation. I argued, against McDowell, that\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0  so resolving the "how should one live?" question is not just what virtuous people do, but what all mature, functional adults do. Everyone undertakes a complex process of adjudicating between all the available goods known to one, sorting them, ranking them, and forming them into a complete life plan. Practical reasons are intrinsically capable of motivating. Nevertheless, there are many practical reasons calling for action, and they sometimes conflict. So success in identifying how to live and what to do requires care, wisdom, attention, and education. Success or failure in this project is defined according to how successfully one "maps the landscape of value."[@] Success is defined as practical knowledge of what to do; failure is defined as practical error \'97 or perhaps ignorance \'97 of what to do. \
\
The mere capacity to reflect on our natural inclinations is a "natural power" of human nature. We are practical rational animals by definition. Or rather, we have the potential to become such with time (no infants have this capacity). The first principle of practical reason, that good is to be done and pursued while evil is to be avoided, is known by all functioning human adults. And some more particular practical reasons are obvious enough to be known by all or almost all. My account leaves room for the commonsense insight that our potential to become successful practical reasoners is greatly helped by education. \
\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
While there is much more to be said to fully defend this account against reasonable objections, I believe I have provided the outlines of a theory of practical rationality that can potential form a satisfying account. \
\
A select list of what "more" there is to say includes addressing the practical reason subjectivist who would argue that the Frey's "practical order" is not really an order "out there" in the world but an order "in here" in the human minds and human  psychology. That is the task for the next chapter. }