{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red53\green53\blue53;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## Wisdom: Excellent Practical Reasoning\
\

\b \
9. Is practical wisdom the telos of humanity? yes\
10. Is it a moral or intellectual virtue? Both. \
11. Is wisdom the only virtue? No. But it is the master virtue.  \
12. Is it corrective? Yes, it executes and unites other virtues by correcting them and proportioning them. \

\b0 \
\
\
### Wisdom as telos\
\
I have tried to show above the close connection of human nature to human excellence -- the connection of form to function. We *are* practical, rational animals by nature. The practical wise among us are *excellent* human beings. *The virtue of practical reason is, not surprisingly, practical *wisdom*. \
\
### Wisdom as intellectual and moral\
\
Yet practical wisdom is strange and likely to be misunderstand: it is both theoretical (aiming at knowing what's true) and practical (aiming at what to do). To co-opt a phrase from Alan Gibbard:^[I\'92m not sure Gibbard would appreciate my use of the phrase.] our activity of practical reasoning is "thinking how to live.\'94[@gibbard2009thinking. I take the activity of thinking what to do in a far more realist direction than Gibbard. However, I have noticed with pleasure that Gibbard himself has become more open to realism in the recent years. He asks us to suppose that \'93normative realists are right about how normative concepts act\'94 (xii), and only wishes to establish the possibility of the truth of his hypothesis that \'93the meaning of this phrase \'91the thing to do\'92 is explained expressionistically: if I assert \'93Fleeing is the thing to do\'94, I thereby express a state of mind, deciding to flee.\'94 (8) He says he is a \'93naturalist about humanity, about human thinking and planning, but in a sense I end up a non-naturalist about *oughts*. Much of what non-naturalists say is right, I conclude\'97but this needn\'92t be mysterious to any naturalist.\'94 (xii)] So practical wisdom is knowing how to live, and *really knowing* it. \
\
\
Practical wisdom is not easy to characterize. But Hursthouse's contrast between "nice children" and adults highlights the intuitive point that practical wisdom depends, in some respect, on time. She continues:\
\
>Amongst the morally relevant features of a situation may be the likely consequences, for the people involved, of a certain action, and this is something that adolescents are notoriously clueless about precisely because they are inexperienced. It is part of practical wisdom to be wise about human beings and human life. (It should go without saying that the virtuous are mindful of the consequences of possible actions. How could they fail to be reckless, thoughtless and short-sighted if they were not?)[@sepvirtue, section 2]\
\
Even though this process of reasoning is not as clear as might be hoped, it is clear enough to defend. The lack of clarity in the account is simply a reflection of the lack of clarity in humanity and our moral lives. \
\
\
Wisdom is admirable as a means to further virtues and other kinds of goods but also admirable in and of itself; an essential part of other moral virtues and a gateway to other intellectual virtues. \
\
As Rosalind Hursthouse says: \
\
>Aristotle makes a number of specific remarks about phronesis that are the subject of much scholarly debate, but the (related) modern concept is best understood by thinking of what the virtuous morally mature adult has that nice children, including nice adolescents, lack. Both the virtuous adult and the nice child have good intentions, but the child is much more prone to mess things up because he is ignorant of what he needs to know in order to do what he intends.[@sepvirtue, section 2]\
\
\
Practical wisdom is both a "moral virtue" and an "intellectual virtue". As Foot points out, out of the four Greek cardinal virtues (moderation, courage, justice, practical wisdom) only justice is obviously "moral" in our usual sense of "other-regarding" traits. Moderation, courage, and practical wisdom more smoothly fit into the "self-regarding" category; practical wisdom fits most smoothly of all into the category of virtues of mind. While there is a growing branch of intellectual virtue ethics within the budding virtue ethics tree, practical wisdom seems to partake of both qualities. The dual nature of practical wisdom is likely to be even easier to misunderstand than other traditional virtues.  \
\
\
### wisdom as master virtue\
\
Our human nature as dependent practical reasoners demonstrates why prudence or *phronesis* is the master virtue. For *Phronesis* complements every other moral virtue. MacIntyre defends Aristotle\'92s conception of the practical syllogism. For example, *I ought to do (the courageous thing of) resisting a student\'92s attempt to bribe me for a higher grade. This student is attempting to bribe me for a higher grade. Therefore, in this case, I ought to do (the courageous thing of) resisting this student\'92s attempt to bribe me.* The major premise here is an evaluative judgment about a virtue or action-type; the minor premise is a factuaion judgment about a situation or action-token; the conclusion is a *maxim*. It is a judgment but not merely a judgment; it is  *an action*. Each piece of the practical syllogism is needed for the whole to function in practice. For without moral virtues, prudence may be knowledge of what one ought to do but it does not entail that one is in the habit of actually doing it. And, more crucially, without prudence, the moral virtues are simply skills -- skills that might be serviceable to bad ends. Without prudence, one might be skilled in achieving *what is not to be done*.\
\
\
\
### wisdom as uniting all virtues\
\
Stated this way, it is easy to see why some have argued that practical wisdom is the *only* virtue. If one knows exactly how to live, in each circumstance, in each challenge, according to proper reasons, and for proper motives, what more to virtue could there be? Maggie Little[@little2007virtue] argues that virtue is a species of knowledge; John McDowell[@mcdowell1979virtue] argues something similar.* So why bother dividing up various virtues?  \
\
\
Although it seems that there are no other virtues because all virtue is knowledge, there are other virtues related to other cognitive and affective features of human nature, each of which, nevertheless, depends on and enhances practical reason. \
\
McDowell already began this account by arguing that virtues are perceptual capacities that helps us pick out -- from the blooming, buzzing confusion --  morally salient facts. Knowledge is not the *only* virtue. Habits moderating pleasure or spending can be "programmed" into our psychological such that they are practiced without conscious thought. But knowledge is a necessary part, for most people, of discovering which habits are worth acquiring and going about acquiring them. \
\
\
I do not think Aristotle himself was perfectly clear on this point. Though he divides up intellectual virtues into prudence, science, intellect, judgment, understanding, deliberation, and so on (Greek: phronesis, sophia, nous, gnome, sunesis, eubolia respectively), and though he says that prudence (knowledge about changing particulars) is inferior to wisdom (science about unchanging universals), nevertheless he says the absence of prudence ruins all other aspiring virtues.[@aristotle NE, VI] As he says, \'93It is evident that it is impossible to be practically wise without being good.\'94 (Aristotle, *Nicomachean Ethics*, 1144a, 36\'9637.)\
\
\
Wisdom is not the only virtue, but it is a unifying executive virtue. It is the one indisputable virtue, for everyone has reason to be wise. Not everyone has reason to become an "academic", but everyone lacks wisdom in some respect and so has reason to become more wise. \
\
The mastery of prudence over other virtues also unifies the other virtues. *Dependent Rational Animals* supplies a necessary unifying base for MacIntyre\'92s virtue theory in three ways: it unifies intellectual and moral virtues, unifies various moral virtues, and unifies the various stages of the narrative of *human* life. \
\
\
### wisdom as corrective of virtues\
\
Can virtue enable the more efficient achievement of ignoble aims? On the one hand, examples are easy to furnish: a prude might display moderation; a thief might display courage. It seems commonsensical that whatever attributes we designate as 'courageous' can be found in agents pursuing bad ends. On the other hand, the Aristotelian line excludes such a possibility by definition. Jonathan Sanford's recent monograph, *Before Virtue*, argues that Aristotle's doctrine is "ethics insists it is impossible to exercise any virtue, with the exception of technical skill, wrongly."[@sanford2015before 163] Foot attempts to do justice to both these concerns. The analogy is to poisons or solvents: \
\
>It is quite natural to say on occasion \'91P does not act as a poison here\'92 though P is a poison and it is P that is acting here. Similarly courage is not operating as a virtue when the murderer turns his courage, which is a virtue, to bad ends. Not surprisingly the resistance that some of us registered was not to the expression \'91the courage of the murderer\'92 or to the assertion that what he did \'91took courage\'92 but rather to the description of that action as an act of courage or a courageous act. It is not that the action could not be so described, but that the fact that courage does not here have its characteristic operation is a reason for finding the description strange.[@foot2002virtues 16]\
\
An agent's commission of an otherwise virtuous action may be a mistake *for that agent* at that time. This may seem ad hoc, but we must remember that Foot is attempting to make space for the "commonsense" observation that some good traits operate to bad ends *within* the philosophically rigorous definition of virtue as beneficial. \
\
One objection Foot responds to is the worry some might have that she is saying *only* those who are completely virtuous are virtuous at all. She has two responses. The first response is that there is one virtue, at least, that always operates as a virtue, namely, wisdom.  While it might make some sense to speak of "foolish courage" (recklessness) or "foolish moderation" (prudishness) it makes no sense to speak of "foolish wisdom". Since wisdom always operates as a virtue, we admire wisdom perhaps most of all. As we shall see in John McDowell's discussion of the virtuous person's perceptual capacities, it might be that when we admire a person's courage or moderation,we are often admiring the *wisdom in* the courage and the moderation. \
\
A second response, though, is that we do admire some who have only a subset of all the virtues: \
\
>There are some people who do possess all these virtues and who are loved and admired by all the world, as Pope John XXIII was loved and admired. Yet the fact is that many of us look up to some people whose chaotic lives contain rather little of wisdom or temperance, rather than to some others who possess these virtues. And while it may be that this is just romantic nonsense I suspect that it is not.[@foot2002virtues 17]\
\
Even those whose overall life is a mishmash of virtues and vices are admirable. My interpretation of this sentiment is that such are admirable insofar as they demonstrate some excellent qualities. Before we stop to synthesis Foot's account, let's look at McDowell's. \
\
\
\
Practical wisdom provides a needed corrective not only to folly but even to the possible excesses or misapplications of other virtues. The negative version of the same reason is the intuitive claim that (practical) folly has the potential to ruin otherwise admirable lives. \
\
\
\
\
\
### wisdom as interpretive knowledge of basic facts\
\
John Kekes argues that wisdom is a kind of interpretive knowledge of basic facts. Descriptive knowledge of basic facts is almost universally distributed. But interpretive knowledge of those basic facts -- understanding the signficance of those facts -- is less common. \
\
What are "basic facts"? Basic facts are things like the fact that man is mortal, since the fact is that animals are born, live, and die and we are animals. Humans have a limited time. \
\
1. Basic facts are known by everyone. \
2. Knowing significance of basic facts. \
3. Understanding is only possible by depth and breadth; breadth covers the range of facts known while depth refers to the significance and meaning of such facts. \
4. What a wise man knows is how to construct a pattern that, given the situation, is likely to lead a good life. \
\
Jennifer Frey says: \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\f1\fs24 \cf2 >Practical reason is the movement of thought towards, rather than away from, material particulars. As I shall argue in what follows, practical reasoning is a movement from general knowledge of what is good and how to live, towards the production of the kind of life that is essentially characterized by such knowledge. When it is done well, what is understood is the same as what is produced: human form or human life.[@frey 2]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fBrFrCDxhJI these moments reflect criminal stupidity. But also just a lack of wisdom. }