{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## A solution: Wisdom and practical ends\
\
My thesis is that it requires some measure of practical wisdom to recognize which natural norms (derived from our nature as practical rational animals) are ethically relevant but that such wisdom aligns with the external, scientific viewpoint. \
\
\
I can know that a certain beam of electromagnetic energy is of such-and-such a wavelength by observing it with scientific instruments *and* by looking at it with my eyes and having a perceptual experience of redness. \
\
The "scientific" point of view is a view of things as they stand in the theoretical order or the realm of law. However, this point of view is not exclusive of the internal point of view, where things exist in the practical order or the space of reasons.\
\
Indeed, the realm of law is within the space of reasons. That is, the scientific point of view is not the point of view *from within* the space of law but *about* the space of law *from within* the space of reasons. The scientist looks at wavelengths as a practical reasoner just as much as he or she looks at potentially fruitful research projects as a practical reasoner. \
\
\
\
>The starting points or first principles of practical reasons are the natural ends that are constitutive of human life.  Practical reason presupposes ends, and our most general ends are constitutive of our form of life, and so shared in common by all mature, sane members of the species.  Aquinas thinks that we have rational knowledge of these ends qua ends\'97we have a kind of natural-practical knowledge of them.  Such knowledge is natural because all human beings have a natural disposition to acquire this knowledge; such knowledge is practical because the knowledge is of the end qua end\'97we know these ends as objects to be realized, and not as facts.  This practical knowledge of our ends is compatible with the self-conscious and self-determined character of a power of reason because it is still necessary for the agent to order these ends, to determine the specific manner in which they will be attained, and by what means.  On this account, self-determination (and thus free choice) is in the space between the general ends and the particular manner in which we realize them.[@frey2014how 20-1]    \
\
\
### Explaining vice\
\
We should not take the difficulty of discerning which 'natural' impulses and qualities are virtuous and rational as a weakness. \
\
It seems rather to me a strength. It allows for Hesiod's insight:\
\
"Vice in abundance is easy to get;\
The road is smooth and begins beside you,\
But the gods have put sweat between us and virtue."^[*Works and Days* 287-9, quoted in *Republic* II, 364c.]\
\
Many people are irrational. Many people are not virtuous. But that is just to say that many people are imperfectly human, and not just by bad luck or misfortune; they are imperfectly actuating the human life form by making bad choices, being ill-informed, being lazy, being greedy. \
\
Just as health leads to more health (a healthy organism can eat, digest, and exercise better than its sick counterpart), virtue leads to more virtue (a diligent person is liable to become patient), vice leads to more vice (a lazy person is liable to become impatient). We ought to take care, at the earliest ages, to ensure the zealous cultivation of virtues in ourselves and others.\
}