{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Adams\'92 theory of virtue builds, in some ways, on his metaethical theory in 
\i Finite and Infinite Goods. 
\i0 \
\
For Adams, to be virtuous is to 
\i be for 
\i0 the good. \'91Being for\'92 is to be understood as a dispositional attitude, a stance, a direction, an overall disposition. But one can fail to be for the good in the proper way. Hence, to be virtuous is to be 
\i excellent 
\i0 in being for the good. \
\
Adams criticizes but builds upon the views of Thomas Hurka (2001 %). For Hurka, virtues are higher-level intrinsic goods involving morally appropriate attitudes to other (independent) goods or evils. Hurka is a virtue consequentialist. He notes that on one view virtue is a \'93disposition to produce what is otherwise good or to do what is otherwise right\'94 (call these 
\i primary goods
\i0 ) in which case virtue is of only \'93derivative and instrumental significance.\'94 (2001, 3%). On the contrary view, however, virtue is itself a primary good. On such a view, 
\i good 
\i0 and 
\i right
\i0  are goods only derivatively.  Hurka\'92s account is \'93intermediate between these extremes\'94 (2001, 3 %). Hurka\'92s account is not a rival to consequentialism but \'93satisfies consequentialist assumptions\'94 while giving an account of the intrinsic goodness of virtue and intrinsic badness of vice (2001, 4). \
\
}