{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 # Natural reasoning: naturalism strikes back\
\
*"The most striking occurrence in the history of thought between Aristotle and ourselves is the rise of modern science."* \'97John McDowell, "Two Sorts of Naturalism", 174. \\\
\
\
## Introduction\
\
Thus far, I have argued that practical reason aims at real practical reasons and goods "out there" in the world. Those goods are goods for humankind, goods for creatures like us, such as food, friendship, and knowledge. I have argued that virtues are "merely" human, but also argued that that human nature is normative; therefore, the proposition that virtues are normative is deduced from the major premise. There are still problems to be solved; specifically the relation between reason and nature. \
\
We want to understand the process of practical reasoning in light of our animal nature and our place in the biological and physical order. The relation between reason and nature is an almost intractable problem not only for philosophers but also for natural scientists, social scientists, and others. Every major philosophical tradition, from Platonic rationalism, to Humean empiricism, to Hegelian objective idealism, has an important and sophisticated stance on this relation. A coherent neo-Aristotelian account is not likely to win over committed adherents of other views. Our goal, rather, is to develop a plausible account that accrues sufficient plausibility points to be a respectable item on the menu of options. \
\
In the sort of neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism I have defended thus far, the general problem is this: Are humans just another instance of biological organisms, like chimpanzees and dolphins, subject to evaluation by the same patterns of normativity? Or are humans a different, even sui generis, type of organism? Or rather, even if humanity is quite different from other species on account of exemplifying (apparently sui generis) powers of rational practice and practical reasoning, how are we to analyze that difference? If we say that the difference is only a matter of degree, we run afoul of the claims defended earlier, that human beings are distinctively practical rational animals. If we say that this difference is a difference in kind, we seem to leave some sorts of naturalism behind. Is there a third way? A third way might somehow reconcile these apparently mutually exclusive options, or break down the dilemma. For example,  objective idealism or neutral monism are attempts to do this. But it is not clear how the third way would work. \
\
Neo-Aristotelian virtue ethicists I am reviewing each choose one or the other of these three responses to this general problem. Recall the two sorts of naturalism laid out above: organic naturalism and social naturalism. Organic naturalism admits a fundamental distinction in kind between living beings and non-living stuff. It argues that there is a clear biological basis of natural normativity. (The whole cosmos including all matter and energy is not teleological, but the whole of the organic realm is). By contrast, social naturalism admits a fundamental distinction in kind between rational, social agents and everything else, whether living or non-living. It argues that normativity is exclusively located in the rational capacities of human individuals and social groups. \
\
This internecine controversy presents us with two different ways of thinking about teleology in particular and normativity in general. The ethical naturalists are split as to \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 "how we can reconcile two seemingly opposed forms of teleology\'97that of life, on the one hand, and that of rational choice on the other."[@frey 14] \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 In a word, where is the space of reasons? The organic naturalist says that the space of reasons is the whole space of natural organisms; the social naturalist says that the space of reasons 
\f1\fs28 what Allen Thompson calls "an acquired and normatively autonomous second nature"[@thompson2007reconciling 245] belonging to human beings alone. \

\f0\fs24 \
\
The fault line is clear. But one further expression of the differences between these two sorts of naturalism deserves comment. Namely, the disagreement also extends to two conceptions of how broadly to conceive of scientific inquiry. The organic naturalist thinks that natural norms can be discovered and articulated (by scientists and philosophers) as part of the normal scientific enterprise. The social naturalist thinks that natural norms cannot be so discovered; they can only be known "from within"; that is, natural norms are inherently tied to the very scientific enterprise which is undertaken by scientists and philosophers. \
\
The task now is to explore the internecine controversy between these two sorts of naturalism. Now, 'naturalism' is a word of many meanings. The root of its extreme ambiguity lies in the ambiguity in the word 'nature'. To square our account of virtue as practical reasoning and rational practice with ethical naturalism requires that we thematize the concept of nature in its own right. I shall articulate two broad conception of nature: the restricted and unrestricted conceptions. I shall argue that an unrestricted conception of nature is the more plausible of the two. And also, happily, the unrestricted conception allows the organic naturalist to preserve the insights of the social naturalist without thereby falling into crass scientism. \
\
\
## Biology and rationality \
\
### Irrelevance\
\
We can break ground on this tough topic presenting two problems that philosophers have had with neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism. The challenge is to overcome both of these while preserving the ethical import of practical reason we have established thus far.  The first problem is called the "irrelevance" objection and the second is "pollyanna problem". Let's state each problem in a bit more detail. \
\
The irrelevance objection states that the natural norms are ethically irrelevant. Jennifer Frey places this objection in context of the is-ought gap: "The irrelevancy objection is a more sophisticated presentation of the so-called \'91naturalistic fallacy.\'92  But rather than crudely rejecting any move from \'91is\'92 to \'91ought\'92, it merely blocks the inference at one crucial juncture\'97the inference from the \'91is\'92 of the species, to the \'91ought\'92 that governs the rational will."[@frey 14]  McDowell is one philosopher who articulates the irrelevance objection. For McDowell, the 'is-ought' gap is a real problem insofar as biology seems irrelevant to particular moral obligation. McDowell concedes, if only hypothetically, the existence of the sort of natural norms posited by the organic naturalist. Each organism pursues its own species specific goods, such as food, shelter, comfort, survival, and reproduction. But when it comes to rational animals, such norms are not binding upon us. As animals, people find themselves subject to hunger, thirst. These merely biological urges are morally neutral with respect to the question of whether I should eat or not. Morality impinges on me to eat certain things at certain times and in ways. A vegetarian might feel an ethical obligation not to eat meat even if the look and smell of it is appetizing; a glutton might feel an ethical obligation not to snack between meals even if he or she feels hungry. His discussion of the "rational wolf" illustrates this point. A wolf is "supposed to" hunt in packs because that is a formal property of its life form or nature. But a rational wolf, a wolf endowed with *logos*, would be just as free as human beings are to step back from such natural norms and either endorse or reject them. \
\
The organic naturalist's attempt to collapse genuinely normative obligations into natural norms seems to him a commitment to "philistine scientism", that is, an over-zealous application of empirical methods to ethical matters. He would strenuously object to sentiments like that expressed by  E.O. Wilson: \'93the time has come for ethics to be removed temporarily from the hands of the philosophers and biologicized\'94 (Wilson 1975, 562). Instead of such crass scientism, what McDowell thinks is needed is the kind of self-reflection discussed above. We must understand the good of human life, commit to pursuing it, and resist temptations to deviate from that pursuit. This self-reflective practical reasoning may not stay within the lines of orthodox "empiricism" but, McDowell would say, so much the worse for empiricism.\
\
### Pollyanna\
\
A related objection has been leveled against Foot's and Michael Thompson's sort of organic naturalism by Chrisoula Andrea, Elijah Milligram, and Scott Woodcock.[^86] The objection states that an empirical assessment of human natural norms would have to include norms that are rather obviously vicious. \
\
When I built my inductive case for the generic that "the human being" is a practical rational animal, perhaps I was winking at the dark side of human nature. After all, human beings lie, murder, cheat, steal, rape, wage unjust war, and so on. Parents abandon or abuse their children. If we gather a robust sample of such behaviors and count them all as natural norms. Are we obligated to fulfill all such norms? Just some? Anscombe anticipates this worry when she says: \
\
>The search for "norms" might lead someone to look for laws of nature, as if the universe were a legislator; but in the present day this is not likely to lead to good results: it might lead one to eat the weaker according to the laws of nature, but would hardly lead anyone nowadays to notions of justice.[@anscombe1958 14] \
\
Expanding the scope of observation to include plants and non-human animals makes matters even worse: Empirically, some acorns become fully grown, mature oaks, but other acorns become stultified, sickly specimens. Most acorns never become anything other than acorns before they disintegrate into dust in the soil. Some animals protect their young while other animals abandon or even consume their young. \
\
On the one hand, to ignore all instances of human vileness could only reflect a prior bias in favor of the light and sweet and sympathetic side of humanity. And where would this bias come from? It could only come from prior *ethical* beliefs, beliefs that are already normatively loaded. I presented the search for generics as "scientific" and objective and open to all the evidence. On the other hand, to include these phenomena in the inductive sample of "human" behaviors leads to a deeper problem. Selfish traits such as cruelty and deception sometimes secure good outcomes for their possessors: the unjust person may "play a crucial role in human survival and reproduction."[@andreou2006getting 71] So some traits that are clearly vices from an ethical standpoint would turn out to be instances of natural goodness. After all, my presentation of human nature was supposed to provide an objective basis for showing how instances of natural goodness are virtues. If some putative vices are instances of natural goodness, then, absurdly, they too would be virtues. \
\
[^86]: @andreou2006getting; @millgram2005reasonably; @woodcock2006philippa. \
\
These objections together constitute pincer problem. The teleology of life (organic teleology) seems to force us to categorize injustice as a virtue or else to appeal to the practical, evaluative point of view; but the teleology of rational choice (social teleology) seems to force us to abandon the relevance of the teleology of life. Caught in this pincer, neo-Aristotelians must either bite the bullet and abandon organic naturalism, or embrace the absurd (or patently immoral) conclusion that some vices are good for us. Is there any way to escape the dilemma, or reconcile it? \
\
The attempt to reconcile the two can twist one into knots: Rosalind Hursthouse seems to vacillate between the two. She explicitly endorse's Foot's naturalism (of first nature) but also seems to endorse McDowell's "naturalism of second nature." She says, "Ethical naturalism is not to be construed as the attempt to ground ethical evaluations in a scientific account of human nature."[@hursthouse1998virtue especially chapter 10] She claims that her account is, like McDowell's, still loosely naturalistic. She still  bases ethical considerations on our nature as rational agents, i.e., "human nature" or "second nature".  But then hasn't she thereby rejected Foot's view? Jennifer Frey also observes: \
\
>On this issue, Hursthouse seems to be speaking out of both sides of her mouth. She wants to acknowledge to Aristotelian critics like John McDowell that naturalistic considerations do not convince anyone to change their basic moral beliefs or motivate them to action. But at the same time, she thinks that she can approach the Humean or the Kantian and argue for \'93the rational credentials\'94 of our moral beliefs based upon a \'93scientific\'94 and \'93objective\'94 naturalistic account. It is unclear how she is supposed to satisfy both parties at once, and the tension remains unresolved in her own work.^[Cf. @frey 44, footnote 55.]\
\
Julia Annas says, of Foot's view: \
\
>What is so helpful for ethics from this kind of biological naturalism is that we find that the normativity of our ethical discourse is not something which emerges mysteriously with humans and can only be projected back, in an anthropomorphic way, onto trees and their roots. Rather, we find normativity in the realm of living things, plants and animals, already. It is part of the great merit of the work of Philippa Foot and Rosalind Hursthouse to have stressed this point. Like many important philosophical points, it is obvious once pointed out\'85\'94 (Annas 1996). \
\
It seems that the pincer forces us to give up what is "so helpful for ethics" about Foot's naturalism and either take recourse to McDowell's sort or else give up on naturalism altogether. \
\
\
## The solution in brief\
\
There is no consensus as to *the* neo-Aristotelian solution to these problems. Nevertheless, some recent work from Micah Lott, Jennifer Frey, and Christopher Toner has revealed *a* potentially satisfying solution. \
\
 First, I will lay out four requirements for a successful answer. Second, I will criticize McDowell's alternative as inconsistent in that he denies dualism at one moment but affirms it at another. Third, I will argue for an alternative solution that escapes the pincer. \
\
The solution consists of two interrelated claims, one about what "natures" are and another about how such natures can be discerned. The first claim is that nature refers in an unrestricted way to anything that is, rather than in a restricted way to only a subset of things that are (such as spatiotemporal material things). The second claim is that we can discern the very same formal nature of a thing in two complementary ways; both from "within" the practical point of view of rational reflection and from "outside" such a view, in a more external, objective sense. Both kinds of knowledge lay hold of identical facts. And both kinds of knowledge are broadly scientific, unless we employ an unjustly narrow concept of science that excludes formal disciplines such as mathematics, logic, computer science, and so on. \
\
Let us try to substantiate these claims.\
\
## Requirements for a successful theory\
\
Begin with Chris Toner's excellent (2008) article "Sorts of Naturalism: Requirements for a Successful Theory.[@toner2008sorts] In this article, Toner argues that (what I have called) organic naturalism a la Foot, Thompson, etc. has not yet adequately responded to McDowell's criticism. To do so would require satisfying four criteria. These four criteria set out in advance the shape that \'93naturalism must deliver if it is to support a revived Aristotelian virtue ethics\'85\'94[@toner2008sorts 222] Gladly, our account thus far has satisfied three of the four. Let us list the four criteria for a successful neo-Aristotelian naturalism and comment on each one.\
\
1. *Natural norms must be intrinsically able to motivate the bearer of the nature.* The "natural norm" must be intrinsically able to motivate.  The natural human norms pertaining to our nature are examples of practical reasons. And I have already presented an argument above that practical reasons are, by definition, able to motivate us. The process of practical reasoning (about practical reasons) is the process of adjudicating between various norms, desires, inclinations, urges, and so on. \
\
2. *Natural norms must be intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of the nature.* The natural norm must be something that justifies itself, either to all rational agents as such or to all moral agents. The norm need not, Toner admits, automatically persuade a Callicles to repent of his wickedness. However, it must be able to motivate. He says: \
\
>This is why I say \'91\'91intrinsically able to motivate or justify\'92\'92 rather than \'91\'91intrinsically motivating or justifying\'92\'92: the natural norm is such that it can motivate or convince persons, provided they are not in too dysfunctional a state. In the same way a rose is such as to be intrinsically able to convince us of its being red. Its failure actually to do so in my case because I am color-blind or jaundiced does not impugn this intrinsic ability. Natural norms can motivate and convince because they are neither \'91\'91mere facts\'92\'92 about the way a given species does go on nor \'91\'91brute desires\'92\'92 a given species happens to have as a result of its evolutionary history.[@toner2008sorts 235]\
\
We have argued above that virtues are intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of a practical rational nature. Toner mentions that \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
"The requirements of the virtues can be articulated into what Hursthouse calls \'91\'91v-rules\'92\'92 (do what is just, what is courageous, and so forth)."\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 [@toner2008sorts 242]\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
3. *Natural norms must be anchored in and express universal human nature.* In chapter 3 I defended a definition of "universal human nature," that we are practical rational animals. And I argued that the natural norm that one ought to become a fully mature practical rational animal (whatever that turns out to mean) is an example of a norm "anchored in" and expressing this nature.  More specifically, all the virtues of rational practice and practical reasoning are examples of such norms. For, as Toner says: \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
"the possession and exercise of the virtues is essential to human flourishing as dependent rational animals. Thus natural norms or the requirements of the virtues, in articulating what we need (to have, to be, to do) to flourish, are anchored in and express universal human nature."[toner2008sorts 242] \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
4. *First and second nature must be related so that the second is a natural outgrowth of the first, and so that that in our given makeup is (first) natural which does tend toward an ethically mature second nature.*\
\
This fourth criterion is the aim here. Even though McDowell is critical of Foot's biological or organic naturalism, he does not wish to fall into a dualism between biology and rationality. Rather, he believes that it is possible to "formulate a conception of reason that is, in one sense, naturalistic: a formed state of practical reason is one's second nature, not something that dictates to one's nature from outside."[@mcdowell1998two] Note that he links the epistemological point with the metaphysical one: the dictates of practical reason come from "inside" one's rational point of view; yet reason is "naturalistic" in the sense that it expresses one's nature. \
\
The problem with McDowell's view is not just that it fails to be "naturalistic", as some have alleged. Rather, the problem is that McDowell vacillates between two contradictory concepts of 'nature': an unrestricted monistic one and a restricted dualistic one. Both concepts of nature have their conceptual costs; both have their defenders; and both are certainly defensible. Nevertheless, one must choose on or the other. McDowell, instead, defends the restricted, dualistic view of nature while insisting that his concept of nature is the unrestricted, monistic one. The resulting concept of nature is incoherent. A second problem corresponds to the first: McDowell's concept of science is too restrictive; although he disputes the "philistine scientism" of his opponents, he seems to me to endorse just enough philistine scientism to deserve his own criticism. He is a scientific realist on one page and anti-realist on another. A third problem is that, even by McDowell's lights, there *do* seem to be primary qualities of nature such as "danger" and "safe" that are relational and actionable like moral qualities such as good and bad. \
\
First, I will summarize McDowell's view of the relation between reason and nature and explain it in context of his broader project in *Mind and World*. Then, I will flesh out\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 ## McDowell on first and second nature\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 In this section, I must try to get a clear handle on McDowell's paradoxical view of nature, practical reason, and the scientific picture of the world. On the one hand, he shares an opinion with non-naturalist realists, naturalistic subjectivists, and moral anti-realists that practical reasons, norms, or instances of natural goodness are not "out there" in the objective world. On the other hand, he does not think that goodness is *purely* subjective, originating in moral evaluators and projected outward by them onto the world. Together, these compel him to object to the Footian sort of organic naturalism I have been defending. \
\
An initial quotation from McDowell expresses his relation to Foot:\
\
>Philippa Foot has long urged the attractions of ethical naturalism. I applaud the negative part of her point, which is to reject various sorts of subjectivism and supernaturalist rationalism. But I doubt whether we can understand a positive naturalism in the right way without first rectifying a constriction that the concept of nature is liable to undergo in our thinking. Without such preliminaries, what we make of ethical naturalism will not be the radical and satisfying alternative to Mrs Foot\'92s targets that naturalism can be. Mrs Foot\'92s writings do not pay much attention to the concept of nature in its own right, and this leaves a risk that her naturalism may seem to belong to this less satisfying variety. I hope an attempt to explain this will be an appropriate token of friendship and admiration.[@mcdowell1998mindvalue 167]\
\
As this quotation makes clear, McDowell shares Foot's rejection of "subjectivism and supernaturalist rationalism". The key point is that he disputes her "concept of nature". McDowell's classifies his own view as a "sort of naturalism" -- namely "relaxed naturalism."[^87] McDowell invokes Aristotle\'92s notion of ethics, by which he hopes to rethink our conception of human nature and nature as a whole. He says, \'93the rethinking requires a different conception of actualizations of our nature.\'94[@mcdowell1996mind 77] Second nature is that space in which human beings are initiated into particular ways of behaving and knowing.  \
\
[^87]: This distinction is by now familiar. For the sake of completeness, I will mention a few of McDowell's other names for his view: 'liberal' naturalism' (@mcdowell1996mind 89, 98); 'acceptable naturalism' (@mcdowell1998mindvalue 197). Like Thomas Nagel, he also finds friends in Plato and Aristotle, calling his view \'91Greek naturalism\'92 (@mcdowell1996mind 174), \'91Aristotelian naturalism\'92 (@mcdowell1996mind 196), \'91naturalism of second nature\'92 (@mcdowell1996mind 86), or \'91naturalized platonism\'92 (@mcdowell1996mind 91). Cf. @fink 204; and @goetz2008naturalism. \
\
For McDowell, nature consists of Lockean primary qualities, which are response-independent as well as dispositional properties which are response-dependent. "Values" are the latter sort. There is no such thing as "to-be-pursuedness" existing as a Lockean primary quality in first nature.  Whereas Foot thinks that normative facts are response-independent features of (first) nature, McDowell finds this view impossible to entertain. He says that naive realism about value is "impossible -- at least on reflection -- to take seriously..."[@shafer2007foundations 137] The first reason McDowell can't take naive realism seriously is the impossibility of explaining "how something that is brutely *there* could nevertheless stand in an internal relation to some exercise of human sensibility."[@shafer2007foundations  143]  In this McDowell agrees with Mackie: the "central doctrine of European moral philosophy" is a mistake;[@mackie] it is wrong to think that some things *merit* certain responses by virtue of what they are and what we are. A second worry is that the doctrine of objective value, where normative facts are primary qualities of nature, has been discredited or outmoded by modern science. The modern scientific picture of nature is "disenchanted" from such intrinsic values as meaning and morality. He says, "The most striking occurrence in the history of thought between Aristotle and ourselves is the rise of modern science."[@mcdowell1998two 174] \
\
### McDowell's alternative\
\
If McDowell is right that the modern scientific worldview prohibits believing that values are objective primary qualities, a natural move would be to embrace a form of error theory or expressivism or subjectivism. Subjectivists of the sort discussed above (such as J.L. Mackie, Alan Gibbard, and Simon Blackburn) believe that normativity is "projected" by philosophers and scientists onto the natural facts. But McDowell resists this move. He says that Mackie's error theory gets right the common sense view that "ordinary evaluative thought [is] a matter of sensitivity to aspects of the world."[@shafer2007foundations 137] Secondary qualities are "subjective" in that they cannot be adequately conceived "except in terms of certain subjective states"[@shafer2007foundations  139] but not in that they are therefore illusory. A secondary quality is not "a mere figment of the subjective state that purports to be an experience of it."[@shafer2007foundations  139] \
\
What is the alternative to the apparently exhaustive dualism of seeing values (or norms) as *either* facts of nature like primary qualities *or* unreal, illusory, and purely subjective. His answer is that values are "secondary qualities" or "dispositional properties" of nature. His essay "Values and Secondary Qualities" argues that values are like colors and unlike shapes.[@mcdowell2007values. I shall cite this anthology. The essay is also printed in @mcdowell1998mindvalue, chapter 7.] We might paraphrase this thesis by saying that natural norms are qualities *in the world* (not just in our heads) but they are not Lockean "primary qualities." They are, rather, Lockean secondary qualities.  Knowledge of such qualities is intersubjective, grounded in a form of life, grounded in our communal rationality itself.  He says a secondary property ascription is true "in virtue of the object's disposition to present a certain sort of perceptual appearance."[@shafer2007foundations  138] Experience of secondary qualities is a (sense) perceptual experience. This a Lockean doctrine. Redness is not *merely* a microscopic texture property (say, the texture that scatters all light waves except red ones) because microscopic textures don't *look red* and things that *look red* appear so to observers with no knowledge of such textures. \
\
Colors are response-dependent, while other properties (say, 'squareness') are response-independent. Color-properties must be defined partly by their "objective" or response-independent aspects and partly phenomenologically. Shape-properties, by contrast, can be defined by their objective or mind-independent aspects. It makes no sense to speak of what *redness is* apart from perceptions of red *in perceivers*. Similarly, it makes no sense to speak of "dangerousness" apart from a subject who is potentially vulnerable. So, perhaps, it also makes no sense to speak of "rightness" apart from a subject who potentially judges the value of a thing. \
\
Yet by the same token right and wrong are not *purely* invented. The property of "being such as to look red" may or may not be *have ever been perceived as red* by any observer (if, for example, the appropriate conditions have never obtained). So a Lockean secondary quality may be response-independent in some sense, but it is not *redness as such*. It is the dispositional property that is disposed to present us with a appearance of a particular phenomenal character. So values (like colors) are dispositional properties. \
\
Goodness, badness, and other values are therefore grounded in "second nature."[@mcdowell1998two 188 and following.] The space of reasons in which our rational capacities operate makes us sensible to those dispositional properties of primary nature which become, for us, values such as goodness and badness. We will explore McDowell's view of second nature a bit more in a later chapter. Suffice it for now that "second nature" is a distinctly human phenomenon. We partially re-enchant nature by bringing primary facts into the space of reasons when they weren't there before. \
\
### Discursus on McDowell's project\
\
McDowell's anti-dualist position here (as elsewhere!) is liable to puzzle or frustrate some philosophers. He is not a realist; but he is not an anti-realist. \
\
To make his view here more comprehensible, it is advisable to briefly give some context on McDowell's metaphilosophy. McDowell is a proponent of "therapeutic philosophy."  He says he is influenced by two main sources: the "Socratic tradition" and Wittgenstein.[@mcdowell1998mindvalue, preface] From the Socratic tradition he draws a way of thinking in which dualisms do not even arise. And from the later Wittgenstein he draws a way of doing "therapeutic" philosophy[@mcdowell2008critics] -- philosophy that \'91leaves everything as it is\'92^[Wittgenstein, *Philosophical Investigations.* Section 124.]. That is, McDowell believes many philosophical puzzles arise not from puzzling reality but from errors in *our own thinking*, so we need "therapy": dualisms need to be *exorcized*. He is an "anti-anti-realist". He is always fighting on two fronts, attacking a position without thereby supporting its apparent opposite. \
\
His objection to Foot and his quasi-subjectivist alternative is consistent with his solution to the mind-body problem. For example, in *Mind and World* he attempts to dissolve the "vacillation" between naive empirical realism and "Rampont Platonism" by arguing that even primary qualities are not given to us in experience without the involvement of spontaneous conceptual capacities. He wants to accept the modern scientific picture of nature as "bald nature", a mechanical "realm of law", disenchanted from values, teloi, and other esoterica. But he does not want to accept that human rationality is mechanical. Instead, he argues that humanity exists in a space of reasons where we recognize reasons for belief and reasons for action. McDowell here invokes Aristotle\'92s notion of ethics, by which he hopes to rethink our conception of human nature and nature as a whole. He says, \'93the rethinking requires a different conception of actualizations of our nature.\'94[@mcdowell1996mind 77] Second nature is that space in which human beings are initiated into particular ways of behaving and knowing by *Bildung* \'97 that is, by education, formation, or cultivation.^[Bildung=formation, education; bild=form, image.] \
\
Practical wisdom is a virtue that the young human being does not have, and the ethical demands of practical wisdom are not even perceptible to her. But she has the potential (within her nature) to develop the answerability to them. And ethical thinking is inculcated in a young person, and then later examined, but only examined from within ethical thinking.  Human beings are intelligibly initiated into this stretch of the space of reasons by ethical upbringing (Bildung) which instills the appropriate shape in their lives. So initiated, practically wise behavior is not just a new kind of behavior but the maturation and development of a new kind of faculty in the human animal. The circularity of this inculcation and new second natural faculty is not accidental: Since practical wisdom is responsive to reasons, it becomes a prototype \'93for the\'85faculty that enables us to recognize and create \'85 intelligibility.\'94[@mcdowell1996mind 79] "[The ethical demands of reason] are essentially within reach of human beings. So practical wisdom is second nature to its possessors.\'94[@mcdowell1996mind 84]\
\
Seen in this light, McDowell's position is comprehensible. Indeed, we should expect that he would dispute both Foot's brand of moral realism and also its apparent opposite, subjectivism and anti-realism. \
\
## Objections to McDowell's solution\
\
### The problem is not idealism\
\
Some have objected to McDowell's view of mind and world as being insufficiently naturalistic. James Lenman is one example: "McDowell is certainly pervasively inspired by Aristotle and he describes himself as a naturalist. See especially his 1995. But I suspect many philosophers would find his use of the term  'naturalist' here somewhat Pickwickian."[@sepmoralnaturalism.] I think McDowell's ingenious alternative to "strict naturalism" is flawed, but the flaw is not an idiosyncratic definition of naturalism. The flaw is a contradiction by sleight of hand. This section attempts to demonstrate that the problems with McDowell's ingenious alternative to empirical naturalism is not that it ends up being a form of non-naturalistic idealism but that it incoherently both affirms and denies empirical naturalism. @fink expertly exposes McDowell's sleight of hand here, so this section will trace his argument in some detail. \
\
To see the dilemma McDowell faces, consider that there are at least two kinds of conceptions of nature: (1) "Restricted nature" picks out some subset of all things that are natural, leaving everything else 'non-natural', unnatural, or supernatural. Fink provides a list of eight different intuitive ways of contrasting (a restricted conception of) nature with what is non-natural. For instance, 'nature' could mean the world unaffected by human intervention (e.g., the arrangement of trees in the Yukon is natural) or "the empirical world as opposed to the intelligible world of the abstract, logical, or mathematical" (e.g., formal sciences contrast with sciences of nature.) \
\
Fink's ninth conception of nature is the unrestricted conception. All the other eight contrast a concept of nature where 'nature', by definition, leaves nothing out. Is just a multisyllabic synonym for "all." As Fink says:\
\
>It would express the idea that there is one world only, and that that world is the realm of nature, which is taken to include the cultural, artificial, mental, abstract and whatever else there may prove to be. There are no realms above or beyond nature. To be is to be in nature and to be in continuity with everything else in nature. Even the greatest and deepest differences are differences within nature rather than differences between nature and something else.[@fink 206]\
\
The question for McDowell is whether nature is best understood as some subset of reality or reality itself. Some might insist that we can clear up this mare's nest by mere stipulation. But Fink disagrees:\
 \
>This is a terminological issue, but it is not easy to resolve simply by choosing one\'92s definition of \'91nature\'92 and then sticking to it. No account of naturalism should forget the fact that \'91nature\'92 is, as Raymond Williams puts it, \'91perhaps the most complex word in the language\'92 (Williams 1981: 184), or as Hume puts it, a word \'91than which there is none more ambiguous and equivocal\'92 (THN: III.I.II.). In this section I shall try to give a somewhat systematic overview of some of this complexity that simply cannot be reduced by philosophical fiat...Indeed, it is a deep root of ambiguity that we can talk about the nature of art, law, language, culture, morality, normativity, history, civilization, spirit, mind, God, or nothingness even if we otherwise regard these as non-natural, that is, as not belonging to nature as a realm. There is no contradiction in talking about the nature of the unnatural, the super-natural, or the non-natural, just as it is an open question what the nature of the natural is.[@fink 206]\
\
Both idealism and empiricism are forms of restricted naturalism. Calling idealism a form of naturalism may sound outrageous to the more empirically minded. But the argument is sound. Fink first derives Plato's *Laws* a Greek trichotomy from between events that come about by nature (*physis*), chance, and art. 'Nature' and 'chance' explain why plants grow, why the sun moves, and so on. 'Art' explains why houses have roofs, why humans wear clothes, and anything else that we do and that nature and chance could *not* have done. The "natural" pair in this trichotomy consists of the first two: that which comes about, so to speak, on its own, *prior to* and *independent of* intelligent intervention from humans or gods. This conception of nature excludes not only the supernatural but also the cultural, the fictional or imaginative, and so on. The Athenian does not accept this "dangerous" conception of nature. Rather, he argues that "soul is necessarily prior in origin to things which belong to body, seeing that soul is older than body."[@plato, *Laws* 891cff] Fink comments on this passage: \
\
>The Athenian doesn't just leave the concept physis to the \'91men of science\'92. He does not first accept their conception of nature and then confront them with the claim that there is something extra-natural\'97the soul or the gods\'97 which they have disregarded and which is in fact prior to nature. No. Like McDowell the Athenian is eager to have nature on his side. He therefore challenges the scientists' right to restrict the term \'91nature\'92 to the soulless, partly necessary and partly accidental combinations of the elements. \
\
The Athenian proves his desired point -- that soul is "older than" and prior to body -- by first defining 'soul' as self-movement, and the cause of motion in other things. Material bodies either do not move at all or they are moved by something else. Since all material things are either moved (by another moving thing) or unmoved, material things cannot be the first principles of motion. But since soul *is self-motion*, it is the first principle of motion. Or rather, the first *ensouled* body is able to move itself, and therefore to move other material things. \
\
Fink's comment is that "This, I take it, is pretty rampant Platonism but clearly presented as an account of the soul as natural because primary in existence... mind is prior to world."[@fink 215] This brings us back around to idealism as naturalism. If soul is the primary sense of nature, then body is "second nature". Mind is the primary thing, the first thing, the paradigmatic thing, against which mere body is contrasted. \
\
Fink bolsters this point with a quotation from Aristotle showing that Aristotle is aware of the competition between the matter-form divide. "Some identify the nature or substance of a natural object with the immediate constituent... e.g., wood is the 'nature' of the bed... [others] that 'nature' is the shape or form."[@fink 216, quoting from @aristotle *Physics*: 2, 1 (192b7ff)] His comment on this passage is:\
\
>Like in Plato, we find here both a definition of the word \'91nature\'92 (an inner source or cause of being moved and being at rest) and two competing conceptions of what that source is, namely matter and form (the material and the formal cause in Aristotle\'92s sense). Aristotle himself finds it most satisfying to regard the formal (and the teleological or final) cause as the nature of x. \
\
We can now see the crucial point about 'naturalism.' Classical materialism is one paradigmatic form of 'naturalism'.[@sellars1927naturalism]  By Fink's lights, classical materialism is a form a restricted naturalism for it affirms that whatever is material is part of nature, and so that the label 'not-natural' applies to whatever is not material (or not obviously material, such as ghosts, souls, and fairies). But *the idealist, too, can rightly lay claim to the title of naturalism* -- and not in a "Pickwickian" sense. Idealism and materialism turn out to be *identical* in one respect: they offer a "restricted conception of nature" and relegate to a "secondary" status everything that is not "natural" in the privileged sense. Idealism and materialism of course *contrast* -- indeed, *compete* -- in that they fight each other for the right to call *their* preferred side of the matter-form divide the *first* and *natural* side. \
\
The upshot of the distinction between restricted and unrestricted conceptions of nature is that no single philosophical view has copyright on the terms 'nature' and 'naturalism.' Indeed, the age-old ideological struggle between materialism and idealism is a struggle over such a copyright.  \
\
Such a struggle cannot be settled by presumption. Nevertheless, the temptation on either side to beg the question and accuse the other side 'non-naturalism' is overwhelming. The materialist presumption is what McDowell calls "philistine scientism".[@mcdowell1979virtue 346] Fink says, "McDowell has convincingly shown that what Bernard Williams calls the absolute conception of reality is merely restricted, bald naturalism ideologically presented as absolute (MVR: 112\'9631, esp. sect. 5)." [@fink 219] \
\
Wilfred Sellars provides a pure specimen of such question-begging:  "I mean that naturalism takes nature in a definite way as identical with reality, as self-sufficient and as the whole of reality. And by nature is meant the space-time-causal system which is studied by science and in which our lives are passed."[@sellars1927naturalism 217] Note that the first sentence explicitly endorses an unrestricted conception of nature while the next sentence secretly slides the ball into the other cup, explicitly endorsing an incompatible restricted conception of nature. The second sentence merely *assumes* that the "space-time-causal system which is studied by science and in which our lives are passed" is "identical with reality". But that is the question at hand. One cannot assert that the sentence "nature is the space-time-causal-system" with exclamation points and pretend to have answered it.  Nobody (not idealists or supernaturalists) dispute that "Nature (unrestricted nature) is all there is"; they only dispute the implicit assumption, that the space-time-causal-system is all there is.\
\
Now, the idealist can likewise beg the question by presenting spiritual or conceptual version of nature as absolute.  My point here is not to criticize one or the other view. My point is that the only  remaining route is to return to the unrestricted conception of nature. As Fink puts it, "Nothing less than a naturalism that deserves to be presented as absolute could help break the spell of bald naturalism without merely replacing one restricted sort of naturalism with another and thus keeping the oscillations going."[@fink 219] Culture, art, human intervention, rationality, and so on are part of the all. Fink quotes Dewey to make this point: \
\
>Mountain peaks do not float unsupported; they do not even just rest upon the earth. They *are* the earth in one of its manifest operations. It is the business of those who are concerned with the theory of the earth, geographers and geologists, to make this fact evident, in its various implications. The theorist who would deal philosophically with fine art has a like task to accomplish. (Dewey 1958: 3\'964, italics in original)\
\
Fink's comment is this:\
\
>On this conception the aesthetical (and the ethical) are not independent of nature, but they are not somehow based on nature or supervening on it either; rather, they simply are nature in some of its manifest operations. To think otherwise is both to mystify the aesthetical (and ethical) and to trivialize nature. The man- made, the artificial, the cultural, the historical, the ethical, the normative, the mental, the logical, the abstract, the mysterious, the extraordinary, are all examples of ways of being natural rather than examples of ways of being non- natural. Nature is never *mere* nature. That which is *more* than *mere* is nature, too.[@fink 217]\
\
Where the materialist and idealist are fighting over the definition of primary nature, the unrestricted conception refuses to fight.  instead embracing both body and mind, brain and consciousness, matter and form, in a comprehensive view. \
\
McDowell does reject the restricted conceptions of nature offered him by the philistine scientism and by Kantian idealism. He rejects one sort of idealism[Cf. @mcdowell1996mind] and rejects one sort of empiricism. Nevertheless, he is of two minds. Unrestricted naturalism has its attractions. The cost, however, is that one no longer has the right to criticize opponents on the basis of their positing something real over and above nature -- such a criticism is meaningless once we have defined 'real over and above nature' as a contradiction in terms. This is a cost McDowell does not wish to pay. Instead of explicitly admitting that he embraces the unrestricted conception without qualification, he puts the ball in one cup and then moves it around to the other side, pretending the ball was in the other cup all along. He keeps his conception of nature restricted (anti-supernatural) while *calling* in unrestricted (neither idealist nor physicalist). McDowell as a hero of anti-dualism has allowed himself merely to *name and claim* an unrestricted conception of nature while fully developing and endorsing a restricted conception of nature. \
\
James Barham captures the dualism into which McDowell unwitting falls: \
\
>the philosophical literature tends to work with a scientifically outdated image of living things as rigid \'93machines.\'94 This results in a picture in which only human beings (or at most the higher animals) can be properly ascribed purposes and agency in the full normative sense. From this perspective, we appear to be faced with an unappealing choice between eliminating teleology and normativity from our picture of nature altogether and understanding these phenomena as they are manifested in our own human form of life as floating free from any grounding in the natural world.[@barham2011 1]\
\
\
\
### Practical reasons as primary qualities\
\
The second problem facing McDowell's alternative is that even by McDowell's lights, there *do* seem to be primary qualities of nature such as "danger" and "safe" that are relational and actionable like natural goodness and natural defect.\
\
McDowell playfully presents an "epistemology of danger"  or a "theory of danger."[@shafer2007foundations  142-3] This moral epistemology helps explain why his view is not a variant of "projectivism." His theory of "danger" is this: Just as there is *something* about red things *themselves* that makes them give us redness experiences, likewise there is something about the dangerous animal itself that gives us fear experiences. That quality may not be *the form of red* or *the form of danger*, but it is also not *nothing.* The "theory of danger" is intended to capture this "something" with the important notion of *merit*. Red objects *just appear as red* to us under the proper circumstances. They *just do* dispose us to have red experiences. But dangerous objects *merit* appearing fearful and dangerous. They *merit* that we have a fear experience. To describe a bear (say) as "dangerous" to rabbits is to say something about bears and about rabbits in their context on planet earth. The rabbit need not engage in concept-use or perceptual judgment -- seeing the bear *as dangerous* -- rather the rabbit merely needs the instincts and perceptual capacities to see the bear. His response is not reducible to a response to the bear's size or fur or any other obvious empirical quality; the rabbit is responding to the danger. Likewise, when we see certain kinds of food as "disgusting" (rotten banana peels, say) we need to assume that we are projecting disgust onto the food; it is more plausible, by McDowell's own lights, that we are being sensitive to what such foods *merit*, given the kind of foods they are and the kind of animals we are. \
\
This is McDowell's own example but he does not seem to notice that it can be used against his thesis. If "danger" is a Lockean primary quality, then "desirable" might be as well. Practical reasons for human beings include facts such as human natural norms and also relational facts obtaining. \
\
### Science as knowledge of primary and secondary qualities\
\
A third problem corresponds to the first; McDowell's concept of science is too restrictive. Or rather, it is inconsistent. Call the two conceptions of science "restricted" and "unrestricted". Restricted science is what McDowell calls "philistine scientism", an overzealous attachment to the empirical methods of inquiry that ignores or denies the formal methods (logical, mathematically, computational, etc.). \
\
McDowell wants to denigrate one kind of scientific realism (say, realism about evaluative judgments of health and sickness) while endorsing another kind of scientific realism (about shapes, sizes, weights, and other primary qualities.) That is, he denigrates the desire to find goodness in (primary) nature as a kind of neurosis or anxiety arising from the philosophical vertigo we experience upon becoming inculcated with "the scientific worldview." \
\
I would suggest that "the scientific worldview" is capacious, including the best deliverances of our best sciences, including the deliverances of biology, logic, and so on. It is hard to be asked to reject "science" (scientific knowledge from biology) on behalf of "science" (scientific knowledge from physics). One begins to suspect, as John Dupre argues, that the request is that we reject genuinely scientific hypothesis from biology on behalf of philosophical materialism. Just because such materialism "dresses itself in the mantle of science" and browbeats opponents with negative labels doesn't mean that its restricted conception of science has earned copyright on the term.\
\
## The solution to the Irrelevance and Polyanna problems\
\
We have thematized the concepts of nature and science and defended an unrestricted conception of both. It remains to address the irrelevance and pollyanna objections. \
\
Recall that "Irrelevance" states that natural norms exist but do not matter for practical rational animals because we are free to reflect upon them and either endorse or reject them according to moral norms, which would not be natural norms. Relatedly, Pollyanna states that a total set of natural norms includes both good and bad norms. So either we have to accept that some natural defects are also virtues, or we stand in need of specifically moral normativity to sift out vices, which again raises the problem of the irrelevance of natural norms. \
\
Frey puts the dilemma succinctly: "The problem our dilemma poses is how we can reconcile what on the surface appear to be quite different sorts of teleology: natural and practical."[@frey 63] The solution, in brief, relies on the account of practical reason defended above. Practical reasoning allows us to apprehend one and the same identical object apprehended in two different ways. That is, our natural human life form as practical rational animals, including the natural norms binding on us, can be apprehended both "externally" by the alien anthropologist who does not bear that life form and "internally" by human beings who do bear that life form. \
\
If both forms of knowledge grasp the same object, then the dilemma between reason and nature is solved. The knowledge of natural norms is not irrelevant to ethics, and the special sifting process whereby we classify some behaviors as accidental to or contrary to our human good is a natural process. \
\
Frey provides a summary: \
\
> the ethical naturalist must be able to show how these two seemingly opposed teleologies (the natural teleology of life and the practical teleology of action) and these two seemingly different senses of good (the good we can derive from an account of what simply is and the good as practical goal) can be unified into one and the same account. That is, we need an account of natural normativity that will show us how the relation between a general judgment articulating some fact about a life form (a judgment about a fact that is potentially known from the outside) and a judgment concerning a particular bearer of that form in a particular situation, can take the form of a practical inference whose conclusion is an action that exemplifies that very same form of life.[@frey 65]\
\
\
### Natural norms are relevant\
\
\
I argued above that practical reasoning is not one of many ways of being motivated but is the very capacity to be motivated by reasons. Plants and animals are inclined or motivated to their good by instinct or irrational appetite. They cannot pause to reflect on whether they should follow through on the instinctual flight from predators or pursuit of food and shelter.  Humans are inclined by their good *both* by instinct (and emotion, desire, etc.) *and* by reason. \
\
I also argued above that the object of human practical reasoning is a quite general conception of what is good. By 'good' we don't mean a non-natural property apprehended theoretically but the something intrinsically practical: the choiceworthy, the desirable, the to-be-pursued. As Frey clarifies:\
\
>Although natural inclinations depend upon conceptual apprehension, we should not be tempted to think that they are objects of contemplation. These goods, as first principles of practical reason, are apprehended as ends\'97as objects of pursuit rather than as objects of contemplative knowledge.[@frey 88]\
\
What is good in this sense for human beings is specific to our species. The primary good of a kind for us is the human life form. The derivative goods for us are any and all things necessarily related to the human life form. In virtue of what we are, it is good for us to achieve humanity, to become fully human. We aim to become what we are. That is, we aim to become in actuality what we we already are potentially. Some of these goods are basic human goods toward which we are naturally inclined: food, shelter, companionship, knowledge, etc. They are starting points without which human beings would not be motivated to do anything at all. \
\
\
Their status as basic goods is not to be interpreted as unrevisable. The normal process of practical reasoning about what to do can and sometimes does overrule the basic inclination toward a basic good in pursuit of some alternative good. The point is that  this overruling judgment is not something over-and-above the practical pursuit toward the good but another expression of the same pursuit. For example, some people overrule their inclination toward the basic good of human companship by becoming a solitary monastic but they only do so in pursuit of *other* goods judged to be *better*. \
\
As Frey says:\
\
>all practical reasoning is ultimately reasoning for the sake of attaining or maintaining these ends. Consequently, all practical reasoning is ultimately for the sake of living the sort of life that pertains to man. Indeed for Aquinas, there could be no practical teleology without natural teleology, since there would be nothing to reason towards if the will were not by nature inclined towards the exemplification of human form.[@frey 66]\
\
Practical reasoning is the process whereby we determine the "sort of life that pertains" to creatures like us, then all particular practical reasonings about what to do in a given situation come to light as parts of this whole. This fits with the account of virtue defended above. There we saw that excellence in practical reasoning and rational practice aims at doing well with one's whole life. In other words, every short-term choice fits into a broader context of life projects such as what career to pursue, whether or not to marry, what friendships to maintain, and so on. And every long-term project fits into a broader context of one's answer to the maximally general question "how should one live?"\
\
\
### The possibility of vice\
\
The natural inclination toward the good in general and a few basic goods does not guarantee success or exclude the possibility of mistakenly pursuing bad things. For we do not *know* a priori what we are by nature. The human life form must be discovered; basic goods for human beings must be discovered -- and they usually are at some point in the course of a normal life. More particular or less basic goods must be discovered with great effort. Mistakes are possible. However, correction of such mistakes is also possible. Once we have a well-supported hypothesis about our form of life, we can begin to sift through many available natural objects, traits, states of affair, and so on to see which, if any, actuate it. \
\
I said that mistakes are *possible*. It is better to say that the possibility of mistaking something bad for humans as good is essential to a correct neo-Aristotelian account of practical rational animals.  Two sorts of error would exclude the possibility:  First, we might make the mistake of concluding that whatever human beings happen to do, whatever behaviors can be empirically observed, are characteristic "human" behaviors. Second, we might make the mistake of concluding that nothing human beings do is characteristic human behavior; wearing clothes, building houses, working for social justice, and educating young people would all be rendered accidental to human nature. \
\
To put the point differently, if we hypothesize that all people automatically have detailed knowledge of what is good for them, it becomes impossible to explain why many of us have vices, are ignorant of how to live, and sometimes wilfully create for ourselves truly miserable lives. On the other hand, if we hypothesize that no one has any knowledge of any goods, even a general conception of how to live, then it becomes impossible to explain why some people are so intuitively judged to be virtuous. \
\
An adequate account must allow for Hesiod's insight: "Vice in abundance is easy to get; / The road is smooth and begins beside you, / But the gods have put sweat between us and virtue."^[*Works and Days* 287-9, quoted in *Republic* II, 364c.] Many people are irrational. Many people are not virtuous. But that is just to say that many people are imperfectly human, and not just by bad luck or misfortune; they are imperfectly actuating the human life form by making bad choices, being ill-informed, being lazy, being greedy. \
\
\
\
### Rationally sifting between apparent norms is natural\
\
The first part of my solution to the Irrelevance problem showed how natural human norms function for us as practical norms. Now I must reaffirm how practical norms are naturalistic, according to the conception of nature already defended.  \
\
McDowell aims for this conception of practical reason when he says it is possible to "formulate a conception of reason that is, in one sense, naturalistic: a formed state of practical reason is one's second nature, not something that dictates to one's nature from outside."[@mcdowell1998two]  But, as I have argued, that he does not quite succeed in achieving it. The reason is that McDowell shares with non-cognitivists an implicit nature/human dualism whereby human rationality (in the space of reasons) is entirely of a different order than organic and inorganic nature (in the realm of law). The alternative I have been defending dissolves this dualism.  \
\
Toner says: "the virtues are seen as acquired traits that fit human beings for the exercise of practical rationality toward which their shared nature directs them (thereby rejecting McDowell\'92s sharp separation of first and second natures)."[@toner2008sorts 243]  This view is more adequate because, as Toner explains: \
\
>The acquisition of the virtues not only prevents emotions from interfering with practical reasoning but also, in McDowellian terms, \'91\'91opens our eyes\'92\'92 to new sorts of reasons for action, not visible to the immature, that make the good of others part of our good. So\'85 MacIntyre links first and second natures much more closely than does McDowell.[toner2008sorts 243]\
\
Human beings are *animals* after all, with animal sensations and emotions and urges, the "sharp separation" between biology and rationality not only cuts humans apart from the rest of the cosmos, but cuts human beings down the middle. McDowell's concept of human nature is not that we are practical rational animals; his unwitting concept of human nature is we are *practical reasoners* full stop. This error infects his definition of virtue as well. He believes that all virtues pertain to practical reasoning (or "sensitivity") where I argued that some virtues pertaining to practical *reasoning* while others pertain to rational *practice.* \
\
This form of ethical naturalism is satisfyingly adequate to the task.  It captures the normativity of ethical reasons and aligns these reasons with the facts of nature. \
\
If my view needs a name, I should like to call it Recursive Naturalism. It is recursive in two ways: first, the normativity of human rationality is both an *instance* of nature and is *about* nature, including about itself. Second, the object of practical reason is both to discover *the thing to do* and, recursively, to become more practically reasonable.   Practical reasoning, when successful, sifts between excellent and defective expressions of our life form and correctly judges the kind of person one ought to become.\
\
\
## Corollaries and transition\
\
A two corollaries of this solution to the irrelevance problem is that the early stages of human life are especially important for creating the conditions in which eventual human success is possible and even likely. The evidence we already have from tradition and social science confirms this corollary. Just as health leads to more health (a healthy organism can eat, digest, and exercise better than its sick counterpart), virtue leads to more virtue, vice leads to more vice. A diligent person is liable to develop patience and moderation; a lazy young person is liable to become impatient and immoderate. We ought to take care, at the earliest ages, to diligantly cultivate virtues in ourselves and others. The earlier we invest in virtue, the greater leverage we have in reaping maximal dividends across a whole lifetime and even across generations. \
\
\
This corollary provides the transition to the next chapter. The cultivation of virtue is a social and communal exercise, not merely an individual one. Introducing the social or group dimension to our account will bring to the surface new problems. As Christopher Toner says: \
\
>whether the MacIntyrean sort of naturalism is acceptable ultimately depends on answers to some rather large questions involving the nature of rationality (for example, whether it is tradition-constituted in something like the way MacIntyre says).[@toner2008sorts 248]\
\
To that task we must now turn. }