{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 # Reason and Tradition\
\
\'93What use would it be if a man had the wisdom of Nestor and wanted the necessaries of life, food and drink and clothes and the like? Where would be the advantage of wisdom then?\'94 \'97 Eryxias (attributed to Plato) \\\
\
*"\uc0\u947 \u941 \u957 \u959 \u953 ' \u959 
\f1 \uc0\u7991 
\f0 \uc0\u959 \u962  
\f1 \uc0\u7952 
\f0 \uc0\u963 \u963 
\f1 \uc0\u8054 
\f0  \uc0\u956 \u945 \u952 \u974 \u957 "*  \'97 Pindar, *Pythian* 2, line 72. ("Become such as you are, having learned what that is.") \\\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ## Introduction\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
My account of virtue, thus far, argued that virtue is excellence in rational practice and practical reasoning.  Insofar as virtue is necessarily related to practical rationality, an account of practical reason was needed.  I argued that practical reasoning is the capacity for identifying and acting on practical reasons. As practical reasoners, we observe some facts as practical reasons. I briefly argued that "practical reasons" are simply facts viewed by practical reasoners as desirable or undesirable, as good or bad. Just as speculative reason is by definition the faculty for judging true and false, practical reason by definition judges worth or its absence. A practical reason can and does motivate one, all by itself; in conjunction with or absent other immediate inclinations or desires. Practical reason, furthermore, motivates when one judges that a course of action or an outcome is good in itself, that it is *desirable* in the sense that it is to be desired whether one presently desires it or not. \
\
 I also, briefly argued that this capacity *really* gets at worth, at what some "objective value." (While I do not think this term expresses my view charitably, it is a common term.) A better way of phrasing it would be to ask whether there is any reason to do anything at all. Put this way, it is more clear that every sufficiently matured human organism naturally has reasons to do some things, to pursue some ends, and reasons not to do some things, to avoid other ends. I also defended the defeasible presumption that practical reason is *important*. It is of unquestionable intrinsic value to human beings. \
\
### Reasoning in tradition\
\
My account of the relation between reason and nature aimed to solve the problem of irrelevance by showing that practical reasoning is *about* natural norms intrinsic to the form of human life. This process of deciding what to do and how to live is just as messy and non-codifiable as the process of deciding what to believe and what is true.  But this brought to the surface a new problem about practical reasoning in social groups or "traditions." \
\
It is an empirical datum that human beings develop their capacity to recognize practical reasons within a family and society with its own idiosyncratic political, religious, and philosophical worldview. So, quite plausibly, our initial de facto set of beliefs, desires, and dispositions reflect the substantive commitments of our group. But even if practical reasons are not easily reducible to response-dependent features of each individual reasoner, we still have to ask whether they are response-dependent features of practical-rationality-traditions or whether they answer to response-independent normative facts. \
\
In this chapter, I must address a broader concern. Is practical reasoning intersubjective and objective or merely intersubjective? We defended McDowell's argument to the effect that that practical reasoning is a legitimate form of reasoning. Practical rationality is rational. So the objectivity of one stands or falls with the objectivity of the other. \
\
Pretty clearly, some normative systems are constructed by the societies that endorse them. Etiquette is the typical example. Other examples include (some of) the rules of grammar, the rules of spelling and typography (Nagel). Is practical rationality a system like this?  If so, then it would seem that a plurality of practical rationalities are incorrigible. There are many etiquettes and many systems of spelling. Likewise, there would be not one human nature and human rationality but a plurality of human natures and *rationalities*?  On the other hand, if practical reason is universal and objective like logic, then it can be universal across cultures and traditions, but it might seem to be bound to conservatism, parochialism, and intolerance. So the question to be addressed is how our account can preserve the notion that reason is objective but satisfy the need for a liberal pluralism. \
\
### Arguments\
\
My thesis is that there is one human nature, expressed variously in different cultures, languages, customs, and thoughts -- and there is only one practical rationality, albeit expressed variously and perhaps imperfectly in various cultures.  My answer arises from an examination of McDowell and MacIntyre's concept of tradition. \
\
McDowell's account provides an excellent starting point but needs supplementation. He argues that reason is *at least* intersubjective and depends on a shared form of life. Furthermore, he imputes a psychological resistance or "vertigo" to those who would search for response-independent objectivity. As a consequence, his account wallows in relativism, to which his only counsel is quiet acceptance.  MacIntyre, by contrast, gives a robust account of how the intersubjectivity of practical reason does not necessarily exclude objectivity.  Response-independent objectivity is essential to the ability to make progress within a tradition, to criticize one's own tradition and to assess the relative merits of rival traditions. \
\
Any discussion of practical reason in traditions is bound to be notoriously difficult. The explanation of that difficulty, I argue, is that we can only think *about* rationality *with* rationality. We can only reflection upon our thinking process by observing rationality *from outside* from  *within* rationality. The matter is so complicated because any argument is self-referential or iterative. These complications should lead us to predict that conceptions of rationality will differ more than other difficult concepts. If two parties share an identical conception of rationality, then a long and arduous debate is not necessary; if two parties enjoy differing conceptions that differ in a sufficient number of respects, a long and arduous debate is not likely to resolve the difference. As the Greek proverb asks, "if we choke on food, we drink water to wash it down. If water chokes us, what shall we drink?" My aim is not to provide a knock-down argument for my view of communal practical reasoning. It is merely to provide a recursive theory of communal practical reasoning adequate (or almost adequate) to the task of both capturing what is common in differing conceptions of rationality. The hope is that this would enhance the possibility of criticizing rivals, rationally resolving disagreements with others, and making progress within one's own group. \
\
## McDowell on intersubjective practical reasoning\
\
We begin with McDowell's account of practical knowledge. He argued that identifying acting well demands "a moral outlook".[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] McDowell therefore thinks such knowledge is not "objective" in the sense that we can check our moral outlook against an independent order of normative facts. When confronted with the notion that the external stance is impossible, we feel a "vertigo". We feel anxious that nothing keeps our thinking "on the rails." We must simply accept that we cannot think from a third-person, detached, \'93sideways on\'94 point of view; we can only think from within our point of view. Instead of searching for an independent normative order of objective practical reasons that *ought* to motivate one, he offers a different "cure": \'93The cure for the vertigo, then, is to give up on the idea that philosophical thought, about the sorts of practice in question, should be undertaken at some external standpoint, outside our immersion in our familiar forms of life.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 341] This is part of the movement toward his thesis that that virtues are ethical qualities that only make sense \'91from within\'92, that they lend a certain kind of perceptive ability to their bearers. Though he acknowledges that we *desire* an external, scientific, sideways on, third-person, "objective" stance from which to identify the rules of rational thinking, but denies that such a stance is possible. \
\
One might object to McDowell's cure on the basis that it makes fruitful moral disagreement impossible.  Suppose two practical reasoners, Jane and Joan, start out a discussion with two incompatible moral outlooks. Jane criticizes Joan's actions by criticizing her conception of the good life relative to Jane's own conception.  But Joan criticizes Jane's actions and her conception of the good life relative to Joan's. Neither can "fact check" the other's conception against the moral facts. So, unless they already implicitly share an underlying conception, adjudication would not seem to be possible. \
\
McDowell points out the familiar case of a discussion or disagreement that end at loggerheads, with both parties asking "But don't you see?" Although it is tempting to want to resolve such loggerheads by appeal to a third-personal point of view standing outside either of our forms of life, McDowell thinks it must be resolved, if at all, from firmly within our form of life. That is not to say that persuasion is not possible. He reassures us that the "Don't you see?" question "can often be supplemented with words aimed at persuasion."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342] Rather, persuasion will consist in "bring[ing] someone to see it as one wants", in one or both parties appreciating reasons they may not have seen before. It sometimes takes efforts to make someone see (to make oneself or others see) "the right way to handle a given situation."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342]\
\
McDowell's position is a form of constructivism. Jay Wallace explains the distinct approach of constructivism about practical reason: \
\
>[The constructivist] approach denies that practical reason is a capacity for reflection about an objective domain of independent normative facts; but it equally rejects the expressivist's naturalistic suspicion of normativity. According to the constructivist, practical reason is governed by genuine normative constraints, but what makes these constraints normative is precisely their relation to the will of the agents whose decisions they govern. The principles of practical reason are constitutive principles of rational agency, binding on us insofar as we necessarily commit ourselves to complying with them in willing anything at all. The realm of the normative, on this approach, is not pictured as a body of truths or facts that are prior to and independent of the will; rather, it is taken to be \'91constructed\'92 by agents through their own volitional activity.[@seppracticalreason, section 2]\
\
### MacIntyre on Tradition\
\
Let us turn to MacIntyre. MacIntyre is most known for his defense of virtue. But the dominant theme of MacIntyre's writings over the decades has actually been practical rationality.[@weinstein2003macintyre 60] *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* and *Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry* treat rationality as the ground of ethical reasoning, while *After Virtue* and *Dependent Rational Animals* treat ethical reasoning as practical reasoning. As we have seen above, MacIntyre and other neo-Aristotelians such as McDowell, Foot, Hursthouse, and Bernard Williams[@williams2011ethics Chapter 1] "morality" should not be seen as a special domain of practical life but the whole practical domain. \
\
One of MacIntyre\'92s enduring themes is that we all inhabit a "tradition." We briefly discussed his definition of a tradition above: "A living tradition . . . is an historically extended, socially embodied argument\'85"[@macintyre1984after 222]. The content of a tradition is partly self-reflexive: it is "\'85 an argument precisely in part about the goods which constitute that tradition." \
\
Nevertheless, the concept is liable to fatal misunderstanding. I should be cutting off the Hydra\'92s immortal head if I were to explain it well here. What does it mean to assert that \'93we all inhabit a tradition\'94? Most trivially, it means each of us are embodied, live in a time, place, and social setting, and speak a given language.  More interestingly, it means that one's 'rationality' is something we which is constituted by one's tradition. Each of us (intellectuals at least) owe our conceptual resources to a tradition. As MacIntyre says, "We, whoever we are, can only begin enquiry from the vantage point afforded by our relationship to some specific social and intellectual past through which we have affiliated ourselves to some particular tradition of enquiry, extending the history of that enquiry into the present ...\'94[@macintyre1988whose 401] The tradition of enquiry we inhabit gives us not only abstract standards of reasoning but also facts, connections, concepts, and the very language we speak. Rationality, for MacIntyre, is inclusive of all the resources by which we judge true and false. Rationality itself as tradition-constituted and tradition-constituting. The resources I receive from my tradition are resources I may prune, discard, modify, or add to. What tradition we are a part of makes a great deal of difference to how we conduct moral inquiry. \
\
Tradition and rationality are bound up together. He invoked the concept of tradition-constituted rationality to explain why practices can vary between people and traditions that both claim to be rational and believe the rival to be not just mistaken but irrational. This is why *practical rationality* is so important for MacIntyre's theory of *virtue.* For MacIntyre, virtues are relative to practices; practices are relative to traditions; traditions are relative to conceptions of rationality. \
\
By presenting rationality and tradition as almost the same concept, MacIntyre both elevates the concept of tradition and threatens the concept of rationality. Since traditions vary, is there any way to avoid the conclusion that rationalities vary -- and do so without hope of reconciliation? His answer to this worry is, I believe, the crux of his whole theory of ethics. \
\
MacIntyre's answer is that we can rationally adjudicate between traditions (from within a tradition). We can justify or "switch" from our primary tradition. The means we have of "switching" traditions are these: first, one undergoes an epistemological crisis in which one identifies the inadequacies of a primary tradition; and secondly, to "exercise... a capacity for philosophical imagination"[@macintyre1984after ] and identify the resources of a rival tradition. We must empathetically engage with our rivals as if we are learning a "second first language." He says: \
\
>For each of us, therefore, the question now is: To what issues does that particular history bring us in contemporary debate? What resources does our particular tradition afford in this situation? Can we by means of those resources understand the achievements and successes, and the failures and sterilities, of rival traditions more adequately than their own adherents can? More adequately by our own standards? More adequately also by theirs? It is insofar as the histories narrated in this book lead on to answers to these questions that they also hold promise of answering the questions: Whose justice? Which rationality?\'94[@macintyre1988whose 402]\
\
\
### Three rival versions ###\
\
MacIntyre picks up the theme of tradition-constituted rationality. His most thorough treatment of the theme of rival traditions is the (1990) Gifford Lectures.[@macintyre1990three] There he presents \'91genealogy,\'92 \'91encyclopedia\'92, and a third version he simply calls \'91tradition\'92 but I will call \'91Thomism.\'92 These three rivals are defined by their respective attitudes toward the past. Genealogists (such as Nietzsche and Foucault) use the past to subvert and \'93debunk\'94 the present.  Stephen Lutz summarizes the three uses the "Nietzschean research program" has for history: \
\
>(1) to reduce academic history to a projection of the concerns of modern historians, (2) to dissipate the identity of the historian into a collection of inherited cultural influences, and (3) to undermine the notion of \'93progress towards truth and reason\'94 (3RV, pp. 49-50). In short, genealogy denies the teleology of human enquiry by denying (1) that historical enquiry has been fruitful, (2) that the enquiring person has a real identity, and (3) that enquiry has a real goal. MacIntyre finds this mode of enquiry incoherent.[@lutz2015]\
\
By contrast, encyclopedists use the present to denigrate and \'93debunk\'94 the past. The encyclopedist par excellence is the ninth edition of the *Encyclopedia Brittanica*, about which one reviewer said:\
\
>The *Britannica* represents the idea of an impersonal, universal, tradition-free conception of rational enquiry into morals, telling a story of the progress of reason in philosophy and the sciences through an appeal to timeless, universal principles of rationality. The encyclopedic tradition holds moral enquiry to be about an autonomous, distinct realm of human life, which can and must be understood solely in its own terms.\
\
Genealogists think, in advance, that no one in the future will use the present as a foundation.Encyclopedists think, in advance, that no one in the future will ever be able to transcend the present; they think we have *arrived*. Now, modernity is an encyclopedic tradition. It was the tradition MacIntyre was raised in. It is the tradition I was raised in, as (I presume) were my readers. So, by MacIntyre\'92s lights, we are \'93encyclopedists.\'94 Our source texts are Hume, Kant, Newton, Locke, and others. Ours is an argument extended through time and socially embedded in the U.S., Canada, the U.K., and parts of western Europe.[^10]\
\
[^10]: Modernity has political, scientific, religious, and philosophical aspects; it is indeed *encyclopedic*. The intellectual tradition of modernity arises alongside the rise of the modern state. We do well to remember that almost all the luminaries of Enlightenment philosophy also wrote on politics: Mill\'92s ethical writings are almost always written with an eye to reforming civil law; Kant wrote the three *Critiques* but also the *Perpetual Peace*; John Locke wrote about perception and understanding but also treatises on government. \
\
MacIntyre followed his own advice. As a member of the modern tradition, he reflected on it. He gradually discovered its inadequacies and searched for resources from his rivals. His attempt to trace the root of the mistake about moral judgments lead him to a mistake at the heart of Enlightenment modernity. As a social, political, and moral project, the Enlightenment has been, MacIntyre argues, a failure by its own standards. Not only is moral discourse largely devoted to moral disagreement, but it is largely soaked in despair of ever reaching agreement. Moral discourse with its interminable moral disagreement retains the rhetorical *trappings* of rationality and objectivity while denying rationality and objectivity. Neither side wants to give up the *appearance* of having a dialectical case for its value theory.  \
\
One of his most memorable and oft-cited images compares modern moral discourse to the hypothetical state of scientific discourse in a post-apocalyptic catastrophe where decaying fragments of intelligible moral discourse survive. It is worth quoting in full: \
\
>Imagine that the natural sciences were to suffer the effects of a catastrophe...Widespread riots occur, laboratories are burnt down, physicists are lynched, books and instruments are destroyed. Finally a Know-Nothing political movement takes power and successfully abolishes science teaching in schools and universities, imprisoning and executing the remaining scientists. Later still there is a reaction against this destructive movement and enlightened people seek to revive science, although they have largely forgotten what it was. But all that they possess are fragments: a knowledge of experiments detached from any knowledge of the theoretical context which gave them significance... all these fragments are reembodied in a set of practices which go under the revived names of physics, chemistry and biology. Adults argue with each other about the respective merits of relativity theory, evolutionary theory and phlogiston theory, although they possess only a very partial knowledge of each. Children learn by heart the surviving portions of the periodic table and recite as incantations some of the theorems of Euclid. Nobody, or almost nobody, realizes that what they are doing is not natural science in any proper sense at all."[@macintyre1984after 1]\
\
The picture here captures the state of moral discourse. But an obvious symptom of the decay of moral discourse and social unity is interminable ethical disagreement.[@macintyre1984after 6] An explanation of this disagreement is that we are trying to get by using the scraps of a previous and whole moral tradition. MacIntyre thinks this version of rational enquiry, like genealogy, incoherent by its own standards. Nevertheless "it still exercises an extraordinary influence on contemporary thought and on university curricula."[@pinkard1991three] The problem with modernity is not merely academic. The social and political fabric is woven from the thread of morality, so many of the ills of modern life can be traced to our inability to share a substantive conception of the good and the good life.  \
\
There are many modern philosophers who have gone into similar crises and become distrustful thought, language, and rationality itself; they join the "masters of suspicion." The term comes, I believe, from Ricoeur, who said: "Three masters, seemingly mutually exclusive, dominate the school of suspicion: Marx, Nietzsche, and Freud."[@ricoeur1970freud]  \
\
Rather than join the school of suspicion, MacIntyre took a surprising course. Moved by Thomas Kuhn's influential work on the structure of revolution between various paradigms in the natural sciences[@kuhn1975structure] he speculated that a similar structure might obtain in moral revolutions?^[His 1977 essay on epistemological crises was his own version of Kuhn's *Structure of Scientific Revolutions* -- we might call this essay MacIntyre's "Structure of Ethical Revolutions". Cf. @macintyre1977epistemological] This in turn lead MacIntyre to recover the tradition of virtues. But virtues are not free-floating moral concepts; they are embedded in a specific, living, moral tradition -- the Aristotelian tradition. And the Aristotelian tradition includes a particular notion of practical rationality. \
\
### Clarity\
\
What constitutes a tradition? MacIntyre's account is not clear. John Haldane (among others) questions MacIntyre\'92s ability coherently to identify what a tradition is. What is tradition A? How do we differentiate it from B? Are two traditions separate and hence identifiable only if they are *incommensurable*? How much difference constitutes separation?  MacIntyre's examples sometimes lead us to believe that a tradition can be anything from a religion (Judaism) to a discipline (moral inquiry) to a philosophical school (Thomism). But even so, how much overlap is compatible with difference? Jewish and Christian traditions share a common origin and bear considerable overlap in authorities, scriptures, and doctrines. \
\
MacIntyre\'92s definition makes answering these questions difficult. He characterizes a tradition as "separate and unified when its members or texts have a core set of shared commitments to beliefs, when the tradition is situated in a particular context in a particular set of institutions and when the tradition has an identifiable linguistic difference when compared to other traditions.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 83] But is there any universal procedure for identifying such linguistic and institutional differences? \
\
The right response to this call for clarification, I think, comes from Weinstein. We should not expect, by MacIntyre\'92s lights, that there is an automatically objective, view-from-nowhere by which we can define tradition itself. Rather, MacIntyre concludes that \'93the concept of a tradition, together with the criteria for its use and application, is itself one developed from within one particular tradition-based standpoint. This does not preclude its application to the very tradition within which it was developed.\'94[@horton1994after 295]  MacIntyre grants that his self-definition of his own tradition arises, in part, from his criteria of that tradition. Traditions change over time. They progress (according to their own unchanging standards) toward unchanging goals or else they abandon old standards. This is liable to frustrate some readers. But the alternative is worse. The alternative is a denial of pluralism that liberalism holds dear. For it is intellectual imperialism to assume that I have the *real* scoop on every other tradition. It assumes I have the right to define and critique all other traditions *in my own terms.* Even though MacIntyre thinks his own tradition correct, and others incorrect, this is not imperialistic. For he is willing to reflect on his own tradition, examine its resources and inadequacies, and engage through philosophical imagination with rivals. \
\
In short, by MacIntyre's lights he does not need a definition of tradition that is any more cut and dry than it is. Forcefully to disagree with this conclusion requires his interlocutor to produce an alternative theory of practical rationality. But that alternative will either aim to be *not* tradition-constituted but universal (which is the encyclopedic tradition) or it will admit is tradition-constituted but the "best so far" (which is MacIntyre's own view). \
\
We can think of this worry about MacIntyre's theory more generally as a problem of thinking about thinking. MacIntyre is a theorist of virtue and practical rationality. Hence rationally to assess his theory requires thinking through our own theory of rationality. The errors we make in *thinking things through* are not likely to be solved by *thinking them through*. The Greek proverb is: \'93If water chokes us, what shall we drink?\'94 The Latin proverb (from a very different context) is \'93Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?\'94 \'97 who will guard the guards themselves? I believe the answer to the rhetorical question is *no one at all* can guard the guards; if water chokes us, there is *nothing at all we can drink to wash it down*. Likewise, if something is deeply wrong with the way we think, how can theorizing about rationality right the wrong? \
\
Some of the errors MacIntyre diagnoses in thinkers who belong to encyclopedic tradition will be invisible to those thinkers unless they themselves earnestly examine the problems of the tradition. Even if MacIntyre\'92s diagnosis is *correct* -- especially if it is correct -- the readers who especially need to hear it will find the diagnosis unintelligible, even irrational. Insofar as the "patient" finds any parts of his theory intelligible, they will seem radical, disastrous in their social implications, and destructive of the very nature and purpose of education. The reason these appearances will be insuperable to MacIntyre\'92s patient is because the patient is, by his lights, self-deceived. He or she simply denies being part of a tradition, and hence denies having a particular (rather than universal) tradition-bound conception of rationality, and hence denies having a particular, tradition-bound conception of the good (perhaps the good is unbounded freedom to follow the moral law, or to pursue happiness,, and justice unfettered equality). Modernity is the \'93tradition-less tradition\'94 and hence *must* deny tradition to be consistent with itself. \
\
The solution to this paradox is not to browbeat people into admitting that they inhabit a tradition. Rather, he directs the arguments (of *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?*) and others at interlocutors who are already undergoing epistemological crisis. This "patient" comes to MacIntyre with manifesting symptoms. MacIntyre offers one possible diagnosis, and the patient's job is to investigate further. The patient needs philosophical imagination to even *consider* the possibility of another truth. The patient needs patience, intellectual courage, and self-reflection. The patient needs to sit in front of the proverbial mirror and mouth the words, (a) \'93I am part of a tradition\'94 and (b) \'93my tradition might be inadequate,\'94 and (c) \'93that other tradition might have the resources more adequately to address the intellectual and practical problems that I now see are insuperable to my tradition.\'94 The critic who would escape the battery is more likely to flee rather than engage; but the critic who would escape by engaging and overcoming is liable to meet her match. \
\
### "Traditionalism" \
\
MacIntyre argues that we should "return" to the Aristotelian tradition of virtue and practical reason because it is more adequate than its rivals. We must beware one misunderstanding. Any talk of \'93returning\'94 is liable to sound nostalgic. MacIntyre is emphatically not defending "traditionalism" per se. \
\
At the risk of sounding paradoxical, we might put it this way: MacIntyre's positive ethical positions are *traditional* but not *nostalgic.* In fact, his definition of tradition is *progressive*.  Tradition is an ongoing, socially-embedded argument over time, which necessarily entails that moral enquiry is dynamic -- even *modern*. To be traditional is not to be past-oriented; to be traditional is to be staunchly future-oriented, since the business of life is not only the pursuit of our telos but the transmission of everything valuable and precious to the next generation. \
\
One critic who misunderstands MacIntyre along these lines is Martha Nussbaum.[@nussbaum1989recoiling] She begins her review of *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* with an age-old dilemma between the social stability afforded by tradition (with its danger of hidebound error) and the social volatility endemic to critical reflection (with its opportunity of progress toward truth). She alludes to this dilemma as articulated by Aristotle: \
\
>In the second book of the Politics, Aristotle asks whether it is a good thing to encourage changes in society. Should people be offered rewards for inventing some change in the traditional laws? No, he writes, because this would lead to instability and unnecessary tampering with what is working well. Should we, on the other hand, listen to those who wish to keep ancestral traditions fixed and immune from criticism? No again\'97for if we reason well we can make progress in lawmaking, just as we do in other arts and sciences.[@nussbaum1989recoiling]\
\
Aristotle\'92s solution is that it should be *hard but not impossible* to change societal structures. Of course, we don\'92t have to pick just one or the other. But one necessary feature of every society is a particular level of difficulty in making social changes. Should one err on the side of difficulty or ease? \
\
Putting it starkly, of the two it is better to gamble for progress toward truth at the risk of instability than to gamble for stability at the risk of hidebound error. \
\
Secondly, tradition is not rival to reason and critical reflection. Rather, one learns to reason -- to critically reflect -- within a MacIntyrean tradition. It is a truism that one learns one's first language within a culture. But it is equally true that one learns facts and methods of reasoning within a tradition, conceived as a community of thinkers who share not only a common tongue but common concepts and a repertoire of facts, beliefs, customs, etc. \
\
So, rather than tradition being opposed to reason, tradition is the first source of our reasoning. And rather than tradition being opposed to critical reflection, tradition is the first source of the habit of critically reflecting. The very ability to expand the repertoire of facts or modify the methods of thinking depends upon the awareness that one inhabits a tradition. This awareness MacIntyre even elevates to the level of a virtue, saying it is "one whose importance is perhaps most obvious when it is least present." What is that virtue?\
\
>the virtue of having an adequate sense of the traditions to which one belongs or which confront one. This virtue is not to be confused with any form of conservative antiquarianism; I am not praising those who choose the conventional conservative role of *laudator temporis act*. It is rather the case that an adequate sense of tradition manifests itself in a grasp of those future possibilities which the past has made available to the present. Living traditions, just because they continue a not-yet-completed narrative, confront a future whose determinate and determinable character, so far as it possesses any, derives from the past.[@macintyre1984after 223]\
\
Strangely, Nussbaum takes MacIntyre to be reversing Aristotle\'92s balance. She thinks MacIntyre is urging for betting on social stability even if it means sticking closer to existing tradition (and hence surpassing or intentionally avoiding critical reflection) than is compatible with unfettered progress.  \
\
This is not an objection to MacIntyre \'97 it is a misreading. MacIntyre explicitly rejects any kind of conservative traditionalism that amounts to fideistic belief in the rightness of one's own tradition. Indeed, he anticipates this misreading of his theory. He says:\
\
>We are apt to be misled here by the ideological uses to which the concept of a tradition has been put by conservative political theorists. Characteristically such theorists have followed Burke in contrasting tradition with reason and the stability of tradition with conflict. Both contrasts obfuscate.[@macintyre1984after 222]\
\
In short, tradition cannot be a name for the impulse to resist change or to fear political tension and turmoil. Quite the contrary: political tensions of a particular character and expression are intrinsic to MacIntyre tradition. As he defines tradition, the internal conflict about the "goods which constitute that tradition" is a necessary feature.\
\
A more plausible interpretation of MacIntyre is to side with Aristotle that the risk of complacent error is greater than the risk of instability. For hidebound error is likely to perpetuate itself across generations, while the instability arising from a cacophony of disagreement is likely to be short-lived. \
\
Nussbaum does not see that MacIntyre's proposed solution is not a sort of *anti-progressive* longing for the past. It is radically progressive.  His solution is not to reverse progress but to replace the Enlightenment's standard of progress with a more tenable alternative.  Ironically, it appears to me that Nussbaum is too conservative in her defense of the Enlightenment's standard of progress; MacIntyre is the progressive here. Rather than accusing MacIntyre of being too conservative, Nussbaum should focus on his critique of the Enlightenment. MacIntyre's critique may be wrong, but it is with that critique that she should take issue. She should not accuse him of failing to "make progress... [in] arts and sciences" but of "tampering with what is working well." MacIntyre's theory of rationality may be wrong, but it is not wrong along the lines that Nussbaum attacks. \
\
Criticizing 'tradition' or defending 'tradition' is almost always ill-advised for the simple reason that 'tradition' says different things. While Enlightenment thinkers used 'tradition' as a catch-all word for people who disagreed with them, the Enlightenment tradition itself represents a commitment to experimentation, thinking for oneself, natural science, and so on. The practice of using experiment to test the theories of physical science is a tradition of scientists and \'93natural philosophers\'94, dating back at least to the 13th century:  "From this objection \'97 should you care to try / You can be set free by experiment / Which is the source for the rivers of your arts.\'94^[Dante, *Paradiso* Canto II, lines 94-96] \
\
\
## Discussion\
\
On the account I have developed in this dissertation, virtue is human excellence in rational practice and practical reasoning. While I have offered a defense of a neo-Aristotelian view of practical reason, there are many rivals to such a view. MacIntyre's concept of tradition was supposed to explain not only *why* rival views exist but to criticize them. MacIntyre would have us believe that 'rationality' is not a disembodied set of timeless and universal procedures of thinking. My rationality includes whatever standards of reasoning I accept, and all the other resources (facts, authorities, memories) I use to judge true and false. \
\
Let us now assess what has been said so far in light of a few objections. We can only mentions  few of the many objections to MacIntyre's concept of tradition. \
\
### Relativism\
\
Once the concept of tradition is clarified as far as possible by MacIntyre's own lights, how can he avoid the charge of relativism at this level? According to MacIntyre's account, members of traditions can leave their primary tradition after undergoing an epistemological crisis. Remember that varying traditions can disagree about a proposition P. Perhaps tradition A finds P true and B finds it false, on best evidence and sufficient reflection. But incommensurable traditions disagree about the standards (say, S1 and S2) by which to judge the truth and even the rationality of other traditions. So A finds P true and rational (by S1) while B finds P false and irrational (by S2). They genuinely disagree. And A judges B to be irrational (since they deny that P) while B returns the favor (since A affirms that P). \
\
Let's put these abstractions into an example. Consider Annabelle. Annabelle is a member of tradition A. Suppose that by A's standards of rationality, S1 contradictory propositions cannot both be true in the same sense. And suppose that A teaches that P. Finally, suppose that P entails both (Q and ~Q). Annabelle discovers a problem with her tradition. She cannot deny P nor can she affirm the contradiction. After some searching about, she concludes she cannot solve the problem and cannot even discover the rational resources with which to solve them. Being passingly familiar with tradition B, she becomes curious why her friends who belong to that tradition deny P and exercises her philosophical imagination to begin to see B "from within." Tradition B is compelling, since it denies that P. She "converts" traditions. However, there is a problem with tradition B, and that is that the standard of rationality of B (S2) allows its adherents to affirm a contradiction. So now, even though Annabelle left A to avoid having to affirm a contradiction (by her standard of rationality S1) now that she has joined B she no longer sees it as irrational to affirm the contradiction (by her new standard of rationality S2). This is surely an odd conclusion. \
\
A second variation on the same problem is this: how would a born-and-raised member of tradition B, affirming S2, ever come to epistemological crisis? Discontentment with contradictions is not available to B members *ex hypothesi*. They do not see affirming a contradiction as irrational. Their tradition can bear a hundred instances of (Q and ~Q).\
\
The odd conclusion of this thought experiment is a dilemma: either such nonsense is possible, or embracing the law of non-contradiction is a universal standard of rationality in every tradition. The latter option seems to indicate that traditions A and B are *not* actually incommensurable, since they share one rather substantial presupposition. The flow of members from one to the other is intelligible. The former option allows A and B to be incommensurable, but seems to freeze members in their own tradition. Members of A would have no (rational) justification for joining B, while members of B would have no (rational) justification for leaving B. So either all traditions are the same (in which case MacIntyre's definition is unclear) or some people are in principle locked in their own tradition (in which case one kind of relativism is final). \
\
While "tradition" and "tradition-constituted rationality" were supposed to solve the conundrums MacIntyre faced, the cure may have been worse than the disease. \
\
\
#### Response: Relative enquiry, absolute truth\
\
MacIntyre's denial of relativism boils down to two claims: the first is that even enquirers situated within a tradition can achieve *truth*, because truth is distinct from *rationality*; the second claim, which is related, is that enquirers can overcome the rational limitations of their tradition. \
\
MacIntyre accepts -- indeed, argues for -- a certain truth within relativism. That truth is that every enquirer seeks the conclusion of the enquiry at a particular time and place, within a particular social setting, within a language, and within a tradition. Following Lutz, we can say that MacIntyre accepts \'93relativity\'94. Relativity (a term borrowed from Michael Krausz[@krausz1984relativism]) is a thesis about *the condition of enquiry.* It is not a thesis about the *conclusion of enquiry.* Lutz approves of Mark Colby's statement that "argumentative situatedness is inescapable."[@lutz2004tradition 89] However such relative situatedness is compatible with objective or absolute or mind-independent or tradition-independent *truth*. \
\
Returning to Rorty's claim, we can say that MacIntyre agrees that "nothing can be said about... rationality" except what is taken as rational in a given society and tradition; where he disagrees is in equating rationality with *truth.* From the historically- and socially-situated position of enquiry, a philosopher (he argues) may indeed find truth. It is impossible to achieve objective or absolute or tradition-independent *rationality* but it is possible -- indeed, it is the hope and telos of enquiry -- to achieve objective *truth.* This may seem a paradox. \
\
The primary kind of truth we seek in enquiry is "the adequation of the mind to reality."[@aquinas Q.16 and *De Veritate* Q.1, A.1-3. "Veritas est adaequatio rei et intellectus."] This is the understanding of truth inherent in the Aristotelian tradition.[^7]  Aristotle says, \'93To say of what is that it is not, or of what is not that it is, is false, while to say of what is that it is, and of what is not that it is not, is true."[@aristotle *Metaphysics* 1011b25]  Aquinas calls this the adequation of the intellect to the object.\
\
[^7]: On the correspondence theory of truth, Marian David says: "The main positive argument given by advocates of the correspondence theory of truth is its obviousness. Descartes: 'I have never had any doubts about truth, because it seems a notion so transcendentally clear that nobody can be ignorant of it...the word "truth", in the strict sense, denotes the conformity of thought with its object' (1639, AT II 597). Even philosophers whose overall views may well lead one to expect otherwise tend to agree. Kant: 'The nominal definition of truth, that it is the agreement of [a cognition] with its object, is assumed as granted' (1787, B82). William James: 'Truth, as any dictionary will tell you, is a property of certain of our ideas. It means their "agreement", as falsity means their disagreement, with "reality"' (1907, p. 96). Indeed, The Oxford English Dictionary tells us: "Truth, n. Conformity with fact; agreement with reality'".\
\
However, 'truth' is ambiguous across at least two senses: a metaphysical, substantive sense and an epistemological, logical sense. The metaphysical sense of truth is simply reality. "Truth" is being itself. The logical sense of truth (which MacIntyre alludes to here) is the adequation of the intellect to those beings. Logical "truth" is knowing the (metaphysical) truth.[^1] \
\
[^1]: The third semantic sense of 'truth' would, naturally, be the accurate relation between the content of one's assertions and the beings about which one is making assertions. Semantic "truth" would be veridical statements about the metaphysical truth.\
\
If we understand MacIntyre to be arguing or assuming that (logical) truth is adequation of mind to reality, we can make sense of his endorsement of "relativity". Rationality is something more pragmatic than truth, something more like "warranted assertability."[@dewey1941propositions 169] That is, the theories we rationally construct are, for us, the "best theory so far".[@macintyre1988whose] It is no contradiction or paradox to assert that our rationality is the best thus far but that others in the future (or the past, or in rival traditions) might be *closer* to the truth. \
\
The second point is that enquirers from within various traditions can (and often do) come to realize that their tradition is incoherent by its own standards and from this epistemological crisis come to find the resources of a rival tradition superior to their own; Aristotelian (and specifically Thomist) moral enquiry is, he argues, more rationally justified than encyclopedic or genealogical enquiry *by their standards* and *by its own standards*.  \
\
In this way, MacIntyre escapes (one iteration) of the charge of relativism. The truth can be known from within the confines of our tradition and perspective.\
\
\
### Evil practices\
\
One of the worries that arose in chapter 4 was the worry about whether virtues can go bad. I offered one brief response there. I also briefly discussed the problem in regard to practical reason where I argued that even though practical reason by definition aims at the good, it can err. This, more adequate response, depends on the unity of virtues under prudence or practical wisdom.\
\
In *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?*, MacIntyre explicitly retracts his earlier belief that virtues exist without a unity under prudence.[@macintyre1988whose preface, p. x] The consequences of this retraction, Christopher Lutz argues, are crucial to refuting the charge of relativism. If virtues are unified, then even though virtues exist only in the context of practices, "no genuine practice can be inherently evil."[@lutz2004tradition 102] Rather, practical reason can judge *apparent goods* as genuine goods. The qualities needed for achieving the spurious goods internal to that "practice" would not be virtues but only *apparent virtues*. \
\
\
Now, such a definition certainly seems ad hoc. But Lutz provides a persuasive illustration: eugenics. Eugenics certainly seems to bear the markings of a genuine practice. Its apparent good is the purification of the gene pool for future generations. However, genuine virtues militate *against* the achievement of that goal. For example, Lutz cites a story of a doctor who had the virtue of compassion found himself unable to pursue the program of euthanizing mentally-disabled children.[@poliakov1979harvest 186-7] We might also recall Huck Finn's internal struggle with his "conscience" in Twain's *Adventures of Huckleberry Finn*. Huck decides to turn Jim in to the slave owners. He writes a letter outing Jim, and says: "I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I had ever felt so in my life, and I knowed I could pray now." Yet for all that, after vividly confronting Jim's humanity and goodness, he feels the loyalty of their friendship and wavers:\
\
>It was a difficult situation. I picked up the letter, and held it in my hand. I was trembling, because I knew had to make a choice between two things, and the outcome of my decision would last forever. I thought about it a minute while I held my breath. And then I said to myself: \'93All right, then, I\'92ll GO to hell"\'97and tore it up.[@twain2014adventures, Chapter 31] \
\
The humor of this passage arises, in large part, because of the tension between the *apparent good* of treating Jim as legal property and the *actual good* of treating Jim as an end in himself, as a free man just like any other. Huck's virtue (in this case, loyalty or friendship) *cannot* be put to use in the service of a corrupting practice like slave-trading. Just as vice subverts institutions and their worthy practices, virtue "subverts" vicious institutions and unworthy practices. Virtue marks the difference between the coward who disobeys his commanding officer's orders because the obedience would put him at risk of painful death and the courageous person who disobeys his commanding officer's order because obedience would require wrongdoing. Without prudence to discriminate between the two cases, we lack any resources by which to discriminate courage and cowardice, between a virtuous resistance and vicious resistance. \
\
Some might worry that the distinction between apparent goods and actual goods brings with it more problems than it solves. It is certainly a distinction that leaves many questions unanswered. My first reply is that such a distinction is inevitable and necessary in our practical reasoning. Assume for a reductio that "there is no real distinction between apparent and real goods." Then either *nothing* is "actually good" (everything that appears good is just an apparent good) or that *nothing* is "actually bad though it appears good" (everything that appears good is a real good). But I take it as axiomatic and irrefutable that some things are actually good (life, pleasure, happiness, friendship). And some things that appear good are not good: obeying unjust laws, enjoying the misfortune of an enemy, etc.  Therefore there is a real distinction between apparent and real goods. \
\
A second reply, however, requires conceding that MacIntyre's theory leaves us unsatisfied. That is, it might be that the unsatisfying aspects of his theory track those aspects of morality that are unsatisfying. The admitted indeterminacy of MacIntyre's account reflects the real indeterminacy of our moral lives. Consider two phenomena: some individuals and cultures persist in behaviors (that I believe) are wicked and unjustifiable -- slavery, child prostitution, ritual human sacrifice, or what have you. It needs to be explained, from within my tradition, how it could be that otherwise decent and normal human beings could persist in such vileness. The other phenomena is this: some individuals and cultures repent and change (what I believe are) their wicked ways. Some make moral progress. The paradox is that while we cannot expect magical linear moral progression from wicked to good everywhere, neither can we despair of any person or culture making moral progress. It just seems a brute datum of observation that some are stubbornly stuck in their wicked ways, and some are admirably firm in their benevolent resolve. How do we explain this paradoxical phenomenon? \
\
MacIntyre's account offers an explanation of why vices sometimes persist within pseudo-practices, institutions, and traditions from generation to generation; on the other hand, it explains why practice-enabling virtues sometimes emerge to disrupt a pseudo-practice, a wicked institution, and a corrupt or at least incomplete tradition. The fact is that "many kinds of activities can be, and in fact are considered to be, practices. Some of these may conflict radically, owing to errors and insufficiencies in rationality."[@lutz2004tradition 103] Errors in rationality explain errors in traditions and hence false ascriptions of the title 'virtue.' Rationality answers to truth, to the world as it is, not merely to the pragmatic  truth to "dialectical success."[@lutz2004tradition 104] Hence, virtues answer to *what is really good*. They do not merely answer to "what-counts-as-good-for-us", which property is relative to each tradition. \
\
In this way, MacIntyre escapes this iteration of the charge of relativism, while still explaining why rival traditions differ -- and sometimes radically differ -- in their evaluations and opinions. Incomplete traditions can, and do, undergo crisis. Particular persons within that tradition discover and asseverate on inadequacies within the tradition, leading to an epistemological crisis. In response, others within the same tradition may become willing to examine the resources of rival traditions and either quit their primary tradition or re-fashion it, re-make it, update it, and make real moral and intellectual progress. \
\
\
### Why be moral?\
\
\
\
#### Why be moral? \
\
A third reply is in order here.  D'andrea[@dandrea2006tradition] points out a critique Philippa Foot has leveled against MacIntyre: after all the informative and wide-ranging historical analysis, MacIntyre\'92s account does not solve the \'93problem posed by Plato, and never solved \'85 that of showing the rationality, for any man, of a thorough-going acceptance of the restraints of justice.\'94[@foot1981. This is the \'93problem of immoralism\'94 she tries to address in the final chapter of her *Natural Goodness*.] The challenge of a Nietzsche or Callicles or Thrasymachus lies in their acceptance that the good life for humans *requires* some virtues or requires virtue in some sense but their rejection of the \'93robust concept of justice with its corresponding constraints on action.\'94[@dandrea2006tradition 430]\
\
One response is this: the question \'93why be moral?\'94 is never asked in the abstract. For example, in describing the "self of the heroic age" MacIntyre says, \'93In heroic society there is no 'outside' except that of the stranger. A man who tried to withdraw himself from his given position in heroic society would be engaged in the enterprise of trying to make himself disappear.\'94[@macintyre1984after 126] Even though virtues in twenty-first century North America are not what the same as Homer's day, there is a parallel to be drawn. \
\
Philosophers often ask \'93why be moral?\'94 hypothetically. They ask it *as if* speaking on the skeptic's behalf, or as if *they* were skeptics. But hypothetical moral skeptics will not do. We must consider a concrete character, real or fictional. Once we look for a real or fictional skeptic, a problem arises. By MacIntyre's lights, sincere \'93why be moral?\'94 skeptics are political or social outcasts. For millions of people who are full-fledged members of their tradition, the \'93why be moral?\'94 question will not usually arise. Parents, teachers, religious leaders, politicians, businesses, and non-profit organizations all have a hand in giving each member of the community the tradition out of which the community arises and within which abstract philosophical or pseudo-philosophical worries such as \'93What does it all mean?\'94 do not arise because they are satisfactorily answered.\
\
By contrast, the emergence of the doubt as to whether one should be moral, and the crystallization of the doubt into an articulate challenge, is *a political failure*. The *polis* to which the moral skeptic belongs has failed him. The moral skeptic, likewise, has failed the *polis* which belongs to him or her. So MacIntyre's theory makes room for people who are not actually skeptical (to whom an answer to Foot's challenge is not required) and people who are actually skeptical but do not belong to their society (to whom an answer to Foot's challenge would be meaningless).\
\
MacIntyre's theory makes room for one more group: moral skeptics *are* members of their own tradition but are seeing the problems within their own tradition and who are troubled by a \'93border tradition\'94. This type of skeptic sees the resources of a rival tradition and compares such favorably with the resources of his own tradition. The skeptic is, in a word, entering epistemological crisis. \
\
Specifically, it might be that the moral skeptic has been raised outside of the Aristotelian tradition and is noticing the inadequacies of his or her own tradition, and is entering epistemological crisis. MacIntyre's response is to invite him or her to do the hard work of resolving that crisis by examining, from within the context of a primary tradition *and* a \'93second first\'94 tradition, the problems at hand and the available solutions, working toward an ever greater understanding of the truth. \
\
In short, MacIntyre's theory gives an account of two contradictory phenomena. It explains how a moral skeptic might arise within a community and how that skeptic might be moved to a more adequate grasp of the truth; and it explains why, in healthy, unified, moral societies, *so few people become moral skeptics*.\
\
\
### Concluding remarks\
\
It should not surprise us that rival traditions disagree, and that even among virtue ethicists rival lists of virtues arise. Aristotle and Nietzsche (despite their other differences) both seem to agree in finding magnanimity a virtue and humility or meekness a vice where St. Paul and Aquinas agree in finding humility or meekness a great virtue. Nevertheless, practical reasoning can find out which of these ought, on balance, to accept.  The fact is that people can and do sometimes identify inconsistencies with their own tradition, identify the resources of rival traditions, and switch traditions. Some of these switches have to be explained as errors; while others have to be explained as improvements. \
\
Reasoning about basic goods is a starting point. Human beings need oxygen and food by nature. These are biological necessities. Biologically, we are animals evolved from simpler animals.[@macintyre1999dependent x] \
\
But we are also social and practical-reasoning animals by nature. Our advanced practical reasoning sets us apart. We have the burden and responsibility to set the course for our own lives, and to care for the dependent among us who are not yet practical reasoners, who are temporarily disabled, or who are permanently infirm.  Any tradition that does not do justice to these realities will be defective. Any practices that militate against our distinctively human life are bad practices. Whatever virtues are included on the list had better not exclude virtues that make human life possible; it had better not exclude (as Aristotle did) women and manual workers from the very possibility of developing virtues. Tradition and rationality are not ultimately at the mercy of perspective but can be rationally adjudicated. \
\
Even after clarifying MacIntyre's optimism about the possibility of ethical truth, his answer to relativism is sufficient but still somehow indeterminate.  The indeterminacy is partly due, as I have suggested, to his appeal to practical rationality. While this appeal seems to me to solve some problems, there is one lingering problem it does not solve.  From my perspective (or my tradition), *every legitimate tradition* affirms the law of non-contradiction. But that is just to say that if Walt Whitman or Nagarjuna denies the law  of non contradiction, then I will necessarily judge them to be irrational.[@sepcontradiction. "Do I contradict myself? / Very well, then, I contradict myself. / (I am large, I contain multitudes.)  (Walt Whitman, \'93Song of Myself\'94); "Everything is real and not real. / Both real and not real. / Neither real nor not real. / That is Lord Buddha's teaching." (M\uc0\u363 la-madhyamaka-k\u257 rik\u257  18:8), quoted in Garfield (1995: 102)]  \
\
Perhaps a qualified acceptance of MacIntyre's claim about tradition-constituted rationality is that when a tradition does not *seem* share this standard of rationality (the value of logical consistency) I should not be too quick to judge that I have really understood their meaning. Perhaps when I ask them if they affirm (S is P and S is not P) they have a slightly different concept in mind for "not" or for "and." Or perhaps they are speaking of an entity instantiating a property and not instantiating that same property at the same time but in ever so slightly different respects. Walt Whitman may be saying he contradicts himself in ever so slightly different respects in order to grasp apparently paradoxical truths that can be predicated of a transcendental modern man. Or perhaps they are denying both P and not P in favor of some other, different articulation of the predicates a given subject instantiates. In the case of any of these alternatives, the principle of charity recommends I extend my interlocutor the benefit of the doubt before concluding that the appearance of irrationality reflects real irrationality. \
\
MacIntyre thinks that "human beings need the virtues" because they are intrinsically good and useful for transforming communities and persons.[@macintyre1999dependent] He began by defining virtue in reference to practice. But moral enquiry itself is a practice that takes place within a tradition. At the practical level of daily life, a small community (such as a family or town or university) does well to organize themselves around a common vision of what is good and a common conception of what qualities will help everyone to attain that good. It can and should be undertaken by regular folk, not just specialists in philosophy. And the goal of such enquiry is discovering what is really admirable and pursuing it, becoming more admirable moral agents through the acquisition of virtues. Virtues are acquired traits that enable the achievement of goods internal to the practices, those traits that sustain traditions, and those traits by which we overcome perennial temptations to lead lives that are divided, deviant, or contrary to our true nature.  Furthermore, at the theoretical level of philosophical ethics, the concepts of virtue, practical wisdom, and happiness supply for moral theory what many modern moralities have not: a clear, coherent, useful, and justifiable theory that grounds a rational pursuit of the good life and resolvable moral disagreements. \
\
### Wisdom\
\
The final chapter must pick up the concept of wisdom. Wisdom crowns my account, for its possession allows the virtuous person to identify rational practices, and to solve the problems of practical reasoning in tradition by adjudicating between rival traditions. To that task we now turn.}