{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 # Wisdom\
\
What use would it be if a man had the wisdom of Nestor and wanted the necessaries of life, food and drink and clothes and the like? Where would be the advantage of wisdom then? \'97 Eryxias (attributed to Plato). \
\
Is not the love of Wisdom a practice of death?' (Ancient Greek. Plato, Phaedo, 81 A)\
\
\
**Nature**\
(1) All natural organisms exhibit formal and functional (i.e., teleological) facts which are expressible in generics.\
(2) Human beings are natural organisms.\
(3) Human beings exhibit formal and teleological facts which are expressible in generics. \
\
**Human nature**\
(4) For any x, the excellences of x are the qualities that enable and partly constitute its being a fully mature x. \
(5) Human beings are practical, rational primates. \
(6) The excellences or virtues of human beings are the beneficial qualities that enable and partly constitute its becoming a fully practical, rational primates.\
\
**Virtue**\
\
(7) Rational practices and practical reasoning enable human the virtues that enable persons and societies to become fully practical, rational primates. \
\
\
**Flourishing**\
(8) For any natural life form x, the natural telos of x is to become a fully mature x. \
(9) Human beings are practical, rational primates. \
(10) Hence, the natural telos of human beings is to become fully practical, rational animals. }