{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 The problem with going against tradition is that the "default" view is plausible to most people. It would not be default if it were completely absurd to most people. Although there are perhaps always a minority who see the epistemological problems of the consensus view. \
\
It is idle to speak of tradition or anti-tradition. "Tradition" says contradictory things. People group A passes along belief P from generation to generation. If A is false, then rational reflection will turn one into an anti-traditionalist; but if successful one will persuade people group A to believe Q instead and Q will be passed along from one generation to the next. So then one will become a traditionalist. These labels are about as helpful as someone saying that he is a "newspaperist" because he believes what is written "in the newspaper." The only question one could ask such a person would be "which one?" Traditions, like newspapers, are a medium, not a message. The only thing to do, then, is to examine the message \'97 the content of the tradition. \
\
The only sense in speaking of being for or against tradition is that the critic who stands back from the default view of a particular culture or subculture is likely to be resisted by the majority. Individuals dislike change and groups positively hate it. It is reasonable to hypothesize that the phenomenon of resistance to critics is likely to appear in a tradition regardless of whether the tradition or the critic is right. }