{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 # Practical Primates\
\
Human nature is normative, such that to be morally good is to fulfill one\'92s nature. \'97 Chris Toner, "Sorts of Naturalism", 221.\
\
\
## Introduction\
\
This chapter argues for the truth of the generic proposition that humans are practical, rational animals. This is "human nature", although I don't insist on the traditional locution, for some reject it on aesthetic grounds. \
\
The last chapter argued that ethical naturalism is at least possible: The is-ought gap is no barrier to a successful theory, so long as we can identify natural norms and show how human norms are examples of natural norms. And I argued that generic propositions do allow us to articulate our scientific knowledge about organisms and the organic normativity of natural life forms and functions. What is needed now is to explain how exactly humans fit into the broader class of natural organisms and inherit the properties belonging to the broader class. If all of organic nature is subject to evaluation according to patterns of natural normativity, and human beings are natural organisms, then the basic idea is that generic propositions about humans would all us to express scientific knowledge about the natural life form and function of humans. These natural human norms would form a firm basis for ethical evaluations of individual human beings. Rosalind Hursthouse states that ethical evaluations of *human beings* "depend upon our identifying what is characteristic of the species in question."[@hursthouse1998virtue chapter 9 abstract.] The 'characteristic', I take it, is a differentiam determining or defining the human life form, or nature, or archetype. \
\
In brief, the argument in the remainder of this chapter is this: \
\
**Normative Human Nature Argument**\
(1) All natural organisms exhibit formal and functional (i.e., teleological) facts which are expressible in generics.\
(2) Human beings are natural organisms.\
(3) Human beings exhibit formal and teleological facts which are expressible in generics. \
\
Chapter 2 argued for premise (1). This chapter will argue for (2) and (3). \
\
\
### Natures?\
\
Chris Toner's quotation in the epigraph says that "human nature is normative." I don't instist on the term 'nature'; we could equally say that a genetically modern homo sapiens sapiens is potentially a practical, rational primate. The important thing is not the term 'nature' or 'human nature' but the concept of a nature. What do I mean by a nature or life form? \
\
In the old classificatory schemes, philosophers provided a genus and a differentiam to pick out the unique "nature" of any life form or natural kind. Not every concept of a kind corresponds to a real nature. But when it does, its nature is potentially discernible both by contrasting it with other kinds of things and by comparing it with instances of the same kind. As Hans Fink explains: \
\
>The nature of x is both what is special about this x and what makes this x one of the x\'92s as opposed to the y\'92s. When x is defined per genus et differentiam both the genus and the differentiating characteristic and their combination could be taken to express what is the nature of x.... Human nature is what differentiates us from the animals and the plants. By nature we are rational beings. Our human nature, however, is also that in virtue of which we belong to the animal kingdom and to the living organisms. By nature we are mammals. We may thus use the concept of nature to differentiate rather than include, but also to include rather than differentiate. And we may use the concept of nature to express that differentiation and inclusion should not be seen as incompatible."[@fink 207]  \
\
As Fink points out, the concept of a nature gathers and divides. It gathers up all the members or putative members of a kind and divides the kind from other kinds.  With this definition in view, we can see what the point of the old formula was, that man was a rational animal, or a featherless biped. There are many animals, but few (if any) other rational ones. There may even be other rational creatures who are not animals: artificial intelligences, gods, Alpha Centurions, archangels, dryads or what have you.  But, so far as we know, we are the only rational animals in the cosmos. \
\
Hence, I think this formula, slightly modified, is still the best way of reflecting on ourselves as members of the organic kingdom, as organisms within the evolutionary tree of life, and as physical objects in the cosmos: a human being is (potentially) a practical, rational primate. This simple, generic proposition is astonishingly rich. I shall argue that it captures the facts of our life form and can be demonstrated to be true from within the human point of view, and from outside it; an alien anthropologist studying human beings from its own non-human point of view could discover that humans are practical, rational primates.\
\
If indeed a neo-Aristotelian account can pinpoint the human life form, then it becomes possible to form a hypothesis as to what kinds of attributes will turn out to be human virtues. And just as we can evaluate an individual wolf by reference to its life form, perhaps we can evaluate individual human characters and abilities, human actions and lives by reference to our life form. Virtues are the qualities belonging to creatures like us. Virtues are the human specific goods-of-a-kind. Relatedly, the acquisition of virtues both causes and constitutes the actualization of our life form as practical rational primates. Truly exemplifying our life form constitutes our species-specific flourishing. \
\
The thought is that virtues are commonly supposed to be excellences of human beings. If virtue is "excellence," relative to what is it excellent? The answer can only be that virtues are excellences relative to our nature or life form. They are the traits or qualities that enable us to actualize our life form, to fully express in a life what we are by nature. If what we are by nature is practical, rational primates, then virtues (we can further predict) will be traits pertaining to practical reason and animality. \
\
Furthermore, if our nature is to be practical, rational primates, then we have some vague notion of our natural "function." I shall not go in for the Aristotelian view that the natural work (ergon) of human beings is contemplative science, an activity by reference to which success and failure may be judged. Rather, I shall be more ecumenical: the telos of every life form is, minimally, to do all the activities that constitute its mature flourishing.  So we should predict quite generally that the human telos is to become *fully mature* practical, rational primates. The conceptions of human nature (as practical reasoning animals) must be defined in relation to virtue (the excellences of rational practice and practical reason) and to human nature as it could be, our natural telos (to be excellent and mature practical, rational primates). \
\
As a corollary, any traits that deviate from this life form would be defects. Some "defects" would not be moral defects. For example, human speech consists of such-and-such range of individual sounds, such-and-such variety of pitches and voice, physiological and neurological properties of the tongue and the brain, syntactical and grammatical properties of the natural language, and so  on. These generics help us to identify speech disorders such as apraxia, muteness, and stuttering by comparison to a conception of what human speech is like. But some defects would be moral defects. We might be able to identify moral vices in the same way as we identify disorders, mental illness, injury, and so on -- by comparison to a conception of what human virtue is. \
\
Spelling out the details of virtue and vice shall be the task for the next chapter. The task in this chapter is to lay the groundwork by defending a conception of human nature according to which humans fit the larger pattern of natural normativity defended in chapter 2. By comparison to the human life form, evaluations of individual human beings is possible. Our task is to provide a conception of human nature that is seamlessly both normative and descriptive. We must first uncover, if possible, a set of scientific generics about humanity, specifying what kind of natural creature human beings are and what kind of characteristic life they live -- what kind of life they live "by nature". Such generics, it is hoped, will give us initial insight into the concept and content of virtue, excellence, wisdom, and flourishing, which are our main themes.\
\
The first section spells out the cluster of concepts entailed in the concept of being an animal and the cluster entailed in 'practical rationality.' It argues that observing human behaviors both from "within" and "without" the human point of view allows us to see what is unique about human beings, their capacities, and ends. The second section discusses a variety of objections. It attempts to sympathetically articulate and provide a response to a series of worries philosophers have about the neo-Aristotelian project of grounding ethical evalutions in some normatively loaded conception of human nature. For example, some think that there are no such things as the sort of "natures" as I have described; others think that there are natures but that there is no human nature; others think that human nature comes with no built in teleological boundaries; others think that human nature comes with a few built in teleological boundaries are the ends of reproduction and survival. Each of these receives an initial rebuttal, though a few of them will require further comment in a later chapter. \
\
\
\
\
\
## Animals of a peculiar sort\
\
I said above in proposition (2) that "Human beings are natural organisms." Is this true? On its face, it appears to be an innocent truism. Humans are primates of the chordata phylum who, like every other organism, enjoy a particular evolutionary history, and move about the earth engaging in activities such as reproducing, sleeping, feeding, dying, and so on. \
\
Nevertheless, as it is currently phrased, the proposition can be agreed upon by two very different readers. One sort of reader believes that human beings are *merely* natural; under the  guise of merely asserting an innocent truism, this reader would insist that humans are machines made of meat in the same sense that all animals are machines and all of Laplacian nature is a machine. This first sort of reader can acknowledge that the human brain exhibits rarefied neuro-cognitive processes we do not observe anywhere else but would deny that human beings are different in kind. A second sort of reader believes that humans are natural organisms and something more; under the guise of asserting an innocent truism, this reader would insist that human beings are organisms of an altogether different kind. Perhaps human beings are made in the image of God, or have a divine spark, or represent the crest of the wave of evolution. This sort of reader can acknowledge that the human body is a material organism like many others but would insist that the mind is something of a different order -- humans are, (in an unforgettable phrase from novelist Walker Percy) "angelic beasts" or "bestial angels". \
\
Rather than pick sides on this issue, I prefer to leave the premise ambiguous. Debating such matters would take us into deep metaphysical waters, while our main goal is to identify, as far as we can, what exactly characterizes our life form only in order to explore whether this examination bears any relevance to the ethics of virtue and vice. My hope is that calculated indeterminacy on this issue will allow for both kinds of readers to participate in the dialectic regardless of their prior metaphysical commitments.\
\
What both readers agree on is that human beings are (at least) primates -- material beings, living organisms, mammals of a pecular sort. This agreement is not so trivial as it might seem. To be an animal entails the presence of several other properties, some of which will be seen below to have potential ethical significance. For example, it entails a particular set of relations with respect to other animals and ecosystems. \
\
I will first spell out a few properties that come along with being an primate, and show how these properties might have potentially ethical significance. Then, I will spell out the properties involved in being practical rational primates. \
\
### What we have in common with other organisms\
\
To be an animal is to belong to the "tree of life" \'97 and to have a location in the broader story of life on earth.  As Michael Mautner explains, all living things (on earth at least) share common ancestors and even share genetic material. He says:\
\
>...phylogenetic trees indicate that all terrestrial life can be traced to a common ancestor. Organisms as different from us as yeasts share half; mice, over 90%, chimpanzees, over 95%, and different human individuals share over 99% of our genome. These scientific insights give a deeper meaning to the unity of all Life. Our complex molecular patterns are common to all organic gene/protein life and distinguish us from any other phenomena of nature.[@mautner2009life 434-5]\
\
While we should not make too much of the genetic similarities between all living things, we should not ignore it. \
\
Zoom out for a moment and consider the human's place in the cosmos. Consider in your imagination that the earth was formed about 4.5 billion years ago; that life arose on earth 3.5 billion years ago; and that anatomically modern humans arose on the earth about 200,000 years ago or in the "Late Pleistocene of 120,000 years ago."[@brown2008virtue 102] The first among our species lived in Africa. They emigrated from that landmass and settled in various parts of the globe. In contemporary classificatory scheme, we can locate humans within the phylum chordata, the class mammalia, the order of primates, the suborder haplorhini, the familiy hominidae, the genus homo, the species homo sapiens. \
\
What can we say about such creatures? Firstly, being an animal entails that one was produced by sexual reproduction. Unlike prokaryotic organisms (such as bacteria), all mammals come to be through process of fusing dimorphic gametes, such as ova and sperm cells, into a fertilized zygote. New fertilized zygotes, once generated, grow through a process of cell division found only in eukaryotic organisms, such as fungi, plants, mammals. Meiosis, unlike mitosis, is a process of division leading to the creation of four daughter cells that do not contain the same genetic material as the original. However, in all such organisms it is possible that errors occur in meiosis, which results in genetic defects. The ethical implications of genetic defect in humans is profound, since some genetic defects are associated with common mental illnesses.[@phelan2002genetic] And mental illness is in turn prevalent among prison populations, or people who are unwilling or unable to conform to the minimum legal and ethical standards of their community.[@diamond2001prevalence] Not all inmates are justly imprisoned, and not all are "bad people"; my point is any reproductive technology which increases the chances of errors in meiosis or mitosis might be ipso facto ill-advised.[@lucifero2004potential; @guideline2006pregnancy]\
\
Secondly, being an animal entails mortality. Life is a process with a beginning and an end; an organism begins life as a tiny zygote and progresses through gestation to infancy, maturation, and adulthood, at which point it may reproduce itself before dying. All of these phases we notice in human animals as well. The human life cycle is characterized by various phases, including growth, language acquisition, puberty, physical maturity and characteristic activities, aging, and death. It should not be a difficult or particularly profound inference that human beings are mortal. However, as we shall see, the value of questioning or attempting to subvert this basic condition is one of the live controversies in bioethics. Furthermore, the question of individual death is part and parcel of the larger question of species extinction. To zoom our perspective out a bit further, we can observe that human beings (like other species) not only have a natural history, and a characteristic natural life cycle, but also a natural destiny \'97 such as extinction, or evolution into a new species, or indefinite preservation through sexual reproduction, or something else. I will pick up this theme in a later chapter. \
\
Thirdly, human beings are animals that have a particular pattern of life. At this point in a description of the human species, the difficulty (I should say impossibility) of separating the biological, behavioral, and social conditions of being a human being becomes plain. For example, humans have 23 chromosomes in each somatic cell, with about 22,000 total genes. Genetic defects, however, wreak havoc on the individual human being. Humans have 32 teeth and an extremely diverse diet of carbohydrates, fats, fiber, minerals, proteins, vitamins, and water: they eat vegetables, red meat, fish, nuts, seeds, berries, fruits, mushroom, mollusks, herbs, and more. However, poor tooth care or poor diet can damage a person's health and lead to illnesses and death. \
\
\
Humans have opposable thumbs, are bipedal, and walk upright, with heights ranging from 4'7" to 6'3" (plus or minus) and weights range from 120-180 pounds (plus or minus). However, these attributes are fragile. Many illnesses or injuries can render humans immoble. Growth disorders such as dwarfism (under 4'10'' in human adults) or gigantism can render a person overly large or overly small relative to the healthy levels capture in these generic propositions. \
\
Apparently innocent descriptions of human animals are inseparable from ethological and anthropological descriptions, which can blend into the normative. The property of being an animal encompasses a whole range of biological and neurophysiological facts that obtain in each normal human being. For example, humans have large brains relative to other primates, with a neocortex and prefrontal cortex that correlate with abstract thinking, problem solving, society, and culture. Genetically modern humans don't just hunt and gather like other animals; they farm, store, combine, ferment, and cook food. \
\
Humans don't just suffer phsyiological responses like fear and excitement or arousal, they wilfully seek out such emotions for themselves through art and entertainment and wilfully cause them in others. Presumably, even an alien anthropologist who knew nothing of human language or "what it is like to be a human" would be able to notice, upon examination, that a human's laugh or cry is different from a hyena's laugh or a crocodile's tears. \
\
Part of the alien anthropologist's examination would be to examine the body, brain, and hands of human beings. One of the first things we can imagine they would notice is that  humans live in cultures and societies. They are not merely "social animals" like apes; they are language-users, communicating in signs and symbols. Their language is an extremely complex, open-ended system which is both recursive (able to nest propositions within propositions) and productive (able to create sentences by potentially limitless combinations of words). In virtue of language and their opposable thumbs, they are creative; they don't just live on the ground or under ground, but build houses and shelters, sometimes in new places, such as caves, trees, hills, mountains, etc. Also, they are self-reflective. They establish social relations upon biological grounds (some children growing up with natural parents) and upon normative grounds (some orphans growing up in orphanages created by philanthropists).\
\
What is the point of these reflections? I wish to point out just how much we can know about our form of life by appealing to the "objective" or third-person point of view of scientific exploration, data gathering, inductive generalization. Before we examine the ethical significance of these facts, we must explore the peculiar differentiem of our species: practical rationality. \
\
### What is peculiar \
\
Practical reason occupies a place of importance in the theories of many virtue ethicists. My primary sources among the neo-Aristotelians have each thematized practical reason in their own way.^[Cf. Especially @foot2001natural, chapter 4; @mcdowell1979virtue; @macintyre1988whose.]  \
\
I shall use 'practical rationality' and 'practical reason' as synonymous. Warren Quinn uses 'practical reason' to mean the faculty and 'practical rationality' to mean the excellence use of the faculty. In a later chapter, I will contrast the faculty with 'practical wisdom', which is the excellence thereof.^[Cf. @quinn1992rationality] I will also defend a robust account of practical reason in relation to theoretical or speculative reason. For now, I shall only offer an initial exploration of what it means to say that human beings are primates who engage in practical reasoning. \
\
Taking a wide view, which activities elicit the label 'rational' or 'reasonable' or 'reason'? As we observe human behavior in context of other animal behavior, the activities that we call 'rational' are as follows: to observe, to perceive as, and reflect; to remember, predict, and categorize; to decide, determine and pursue; to abstract, explain, and infer; to criticize, blame, and praise; to admonish, prohibit, and command; and so on. Is there any way to pare down this list or to generalize these capacities? \
\
I do not think the best way to understand the old formula of "rational animals" is to take "rational" to mean "abstract thought." Practical reasoning is indeed a form of reasoning. And while other members of the animal kingdom "think" in one sense of that term, as far as we know, no other animal constructs theories about the cognitive capacities of the animal kingdom. Nevertheless, abstract thinking is not a sufficient property to distinguish the human life form as a whole. Only a relatively small minority of humans engage in that kind of abstract reflection that characterizes science, theology, mathematics, metaphysics, ethics, and so on, while all people of all cultures and of all intelligence quotients engage in practical reasoning and deliberation.  I want to make it indelibly clear that I am not supposing human nature to be rationality per se but practical rationality. \
\
I would like to argue that being a potentially rational animal entails at least four other properties besides the capacity for abstract thought. They are: speech, sociality, rational practice, and creativity. Let's consider each in turn, and show how they interconnect.\
\
First, take speech. Aristotle observed that, "Man alone of the animals possesses speech."^[*Politics*, 1.1253a.]  Nothing in modern science has superseded or contradicted the observation (obvious to anyone) that human speech is different from other animal noises. Other animals have speech and communication. The difference between non-human and human speech is not obvious to infant humans, who learned by imitation words just as well as they learn tweets barks and growls. Upon reflection, researchers have observed that animals communicate with non-grammatical closed systems with a small, finite set of symbols. Communication systems used by other animals such as bees or apes are closed systems that consist of a finite, usually very limited, number of possible ideas that can be expressed. In contrast, human language is open-ended and productive, meaning that it allows humans to produce a vast range of utterances from a finite set of elements, and to create new words and sentences. Our language is unique: it is grammatical, open-ended, recursive, and productive. We are animals who use signs and symbols to communicate self-reflective and abstract thought.[@deacon1998symbolic]  \
\
Speech is inseparable from self-reflectivity and sociality. Through our animal senses comes a sensitivity to our surroundings, the ability to see the world, ourselves, the sun and stars, to hear our fellow creatures, and to take the whole cosmos into consciousness. But through speech comes a whole second cosmos of culture. Through speech comes intentionality in all its forms. Through speech comes communication ("pass the salt"), distinct languages and cultures (about 5,000 distinct languages), self-consciousness ("who am I?"), abstraction ("all grass is green"), science, philosophy, religion, mythology, technology and more. Perhaps even art and music arise from the rational capacity to direct our actions to create not only what instinct demands but whatever the imagination can invent.[@orians2008nature. Orians says that "Americans spend more money on music than on sex or prescription drugs."]\
 \
The second constituitive feature of practical reason is sociality. When Aristotle asserted that "Humans are political animals," he did not mean the facile point that human beings prefer to reside in groups or enjoy "getting involved in politics". We ought to interpret this assertion as a generic truth. Human beings are formally constituted by being animals in political or communal settings. This truth is best viewed in light of our animality and speech: for to be a human being is to be a creature produced by the sexual union of two other human gametes, and to be able to speak is to be enculturated in a particular natural language in a time in human history and a place on the globe. We shall return to the importance of sociality in our discussion of traditions in a later chapter. \
\
The third feature of practical reason is the ability to engage in rational practices. All organisms initiate *action* in the most general sense that they move about and do things. And all higher mammals engage in complex (and often social) practices, such as communal hunting, grooming, and building. Humans exhibit something apparently unique: We do not just act but act on reasons. Micah Lott says: "Human form is characterized by practical reason. This is the capacity to act in light of an awareness of the ground of our actions, to recognize and respond to practical reasons."[@lott2012moral] We set goals. We undertake long, complicated sets of actions in order to achieve those goals. We also reflect on past actions and evalute them to decide whether it is advisable to do the same thing again or try something else. Practical reasoning includes not just deliberating about what to do but weighing the apparent reasons for and against a particular course of action. Hence, as I shall explain more later, it is under the category of 'rational practice' that I will include everything unique about humans having to do with morality. \
\
The fourth feature is rational creation. The concept of 'creativity' is not metaphysically distinct from rational practice, but since it is conceptually distinct, it deserves some mention. Our speech and grammatical systems allow us to create new words, propositions, phrases, and of course to do thing like write philosophy papers or tell stories. Our social identity within a social order allows us to create living spaces, utensils, farming implements, and so on as well as to create new social orders themselves. And one of the forms practical reasoning takes is that we *innovate* \'97 we create and design and plan actions, new behaviors, new games, new languages, new activities, and so on. \
\
The human differentiam of 'practical rationality' entails not only abstract reasoning but speech, sociality, rational practice, and creation. The alien anthropologist, if indeed it had enough of its own rationality to be able to have anthropological science, could observe these actions and infer the existence of the property of rationality. \
\
\
### Potential\
\
The point of these reflections has been to bear out the truth of the generic that human beings are practical, rational animals. I must address a few possible misunderstandings.\
\
First, some unwittingly entertain the assumption that "rationality" for Aristotle meant speculative reasoning \'97 that is, *theoria*, abstract thinking, or contemplative science. The capacity for abstract or "theoretical reason" is certainly an important feature of human nature and stands out from the capacities of other organisms. But it is not merely *thought* but *thoughtful action* that I would like to emphasize. \
\
Secondly, "human beings are practical rational animals" might be interpreted to mean that anyone who is not rational is not human. There does exist a monstrous thought that humans who are not fully rational are not *"really"* human. An uncharitable critic might accuse me of insinuating that monstrous thought. If people in comas, or the mentally ill, the genetically defective, are not even human then it would seem to be permissible to do all sorts of inhumanities. \
\
Robert P. George makes this point well:\
\
>Various criteria for where the line should be drawn [between living things it is permissible to use and those it is not permissible to use] have been proposed: sentience, consciousness, self-awareness, rationality, or being a moral agent (the last two come to the same thing). We will argue that the criterion is: having a rational nature, that is, having the natural capacity to reason and make free choices, a capacity it ordinarily takes months, or even years, to actualize, and which various impediments might prevent from being brought to full actualization, at least in this life. Thus, every human being has full moral worth or dignity, for every human being possesses such a rational nature.[@schulman2008human chapter 16, "The Nature and Basis of Human Dignity"]\
\
On the contrary, one of its strengths of the fact that 'humans are practical rational animals' is a generic is that it blocks this kind of monstrous thought, for it admits of exceptions. Generics describe a life form well only when the sample includes exemplary instances of the species \'97 not young, immature, ill, or injured instances. Especially in the case of young organisms we need to invoke the notion of *potential*. Even single celled organisms have the potential to reproduce and develop. \
\
Anacephalic babies will never exemplify their natural potential for practical reasoning, for they lack the subvenient brain structure necessary for rational consciousness.  They are recognizably *human* (they are not opossums), just defectively so. Similarly, we may call humans "bipedal" by nature but recognize that a war veteran is still human even after he or she is no longer bipedal. \
\
Injury, illness, genetic defect, radiation poisoning, coma, mental illness, and any number of other negatives may render a human being sub-rational or non-practical \'97 that is, unable to direct his or her own life. The same point can be applied to those organisms, who by injury or illness, will never reveal the potentials inherit in their life form. Although that individual instance may be imperfectly actuating its species, it is still a member of the species. \
\
Scientists do not judge the characteristics of a newly discovered species by examining its young. If an alien anthropologist were to study 12-year-old humans, they would come to all sorts of conclusions about humanity in general. Their conclusions would be a week since their sample is week. Alien anthropologists would need to look at mature human beings of both sexes, healthy and in the "prime" of life. Younger than this range and humans tend to (but do not always) lack the brain development to fully represent characteristic behaviors; older than this range and humans tend to (but do not always) suffer degenerations of the joints, memory, health, and so on. A similar point can be made with regard to injury and illness. \
\
\
\
\
Before considering the application of my argument to ethics, I would like to stop and address a few objections. \
\
## Objections\
\
I would like to consider a couple of possible responses the reader might have at this juncture. These objections are formidable. However, responses are possible, even though some of the responses I will offer now will require further comment in a later chapter. Let's consider each in turn.\
\
\
### No human nature\
\
The first objection is simply that the search for human nature is hopeless because there is no human nature. This objection has three iterations. The first sort of critic might deny that there is any such thing as a human life form because there are no life forms at all. This is an objection to the very concept of a nature. Perhaps, instead of real life forms and natural kinds, we should be nominalist about divisions between various branches of the tree of life. One iteration of this criticism is an alleged tension between the flexibility of species (as represented in evolutionary biology) and a fixed notion of human nature. Ernst Mayr says:\
\
>The concepts of unchanging essences and of complete discontinuities between every *eidos* (type) and all others make genuine evolutionary thinking impossible. I\'a0agree with those who claim that the essentialist philosophies of Aristotle and Plato are incompatible with evolutionary thinking.[@mayr1970populations 4]\
\
Arthur Ward is one who agrees with Mayr here. He argues that "naturalists should reject the idea of 'human nature,' and indeed should reject that any organism or its parts or operations has a nature, purpose, proper function, or the like."[@ward2013against 1] I have already pointed out that rejecting all organic natures and purposes is not necessarily the only rational, scientific option; indeed, such a rejection seems to me to be motivated by philosophical materialism far more than it is motivated by any respect for actual biological science. Nevertheless, I cannot insist on the other hand that accepting organic natures and purposes is the *only* rational, scientific option. Rather, to the idea that there are no natural kinds, I can only give a general and unsatisfactory response. This dissertation cannot chase down the (justifiably important) conversation about realism and nominalism in natural kinds. However, the arguments of the previous chapter, built on the assumption of a minimal scientific realism, is enough to secure a fairly solid grounding for the notion of natural kinds. \
\
A second sort of critic accepts natural kinds but denies that these kinds have teleological features.  This reader would agree with Bernard Williams:   "The first and hardest lesson of Darwinism, that there is no such teleology at all, and that there is no orchestral score provided from anywhere according to which human beings have a special part to play, still has to find its way into ethical thought."[@williams2011ethics 44]\
\
He says elsewhere:\
\
>The idea of a naturalistic ethics was born of a deeply teleological outlook, and its best expression, in many ways, is still to be found in Aristotle's philosophy, a philosophy according to which there is inherent in each natural kind of thing an appropriate way for things of that kind to behave.[Cf. @williams1995making 109] \
\
This sort of critic thinks that there are natures or natural kinds and stable species with objective properties, but is underwhelmed by the arguments of the previous chapter to the effect that functional or teleological properties feature in purely biological descriptions of organisms. \
\
My response is this: Williams voices a common opinion when he alleges an incompatibility between Darwinism and teleological realism. The response of Hursthouse, Foot, Brown, etc., is that natural teleology is indeed compatible with Darwinism and does indeed provide a "an appropriate way to behave" (or we might add, *ways*) that is "inherent in each natural kind of thing." Such a view is not incompatible with evolutionary theory. \
\
Strictly speaking, evolutionary theory may be summarized in five theses explaining the current multiplicity and shape of terrestrial life: 1. The earth is very old; 2. Life has progressed from relatively simple to relatively complex forms; 3. Through slow and gradual changes, all the modern forms of live have appeared; 4. All of life originated from one original place and species; 5. Some mechanism such as natural selection drives the process of descent with modification. [Cf. @plantinga2011conflict 8-9.] The set of theses together explain biological processes of genetic mutation, reproduction, preservation, and proliferation. Thus, evolutionary theory, strictly speaking says absolutely nothing about teleological causes or properties.[Cf. @plantinga2011conflict 10.] \
\
A sixth thesis, often appended to the first five, is that the process of natural selection is unguided by any causes but mechanical ones. But this claim is a philosophical belief, not a biological one. Polemicists will sometimes cite the popularity of the philosophical belief among biologists as proof that it is a "biological" claim. But we do not determine truth by vote. If belief in God was popular among biologists of a certain era, it does not follow that theological claims are strictly biological claims. \
\
Thomas Nagel recently presented a persuasive (and controversial) case for what he calls "Darwinism plus" \'97 that is, naturalistic Darwinian evolution plus natural teleological causation.[@nagel2012mind] Teleological laws work impersonally on entities over time at the same moment that physical laws work impersonally on entities at a given time. I do not wish here to defend Nagel's view so much as to point out that teleological realism is compatible with evolutionary theory. Asserting that teleological realism about biology is incompatible with Darwinism does not make it so. Naturalistic teleological realism is certainly incompatible with a teleological nihilism distinctive of (certain brands) of metaphysical reductionism.  If our knowledge of natural teleology is well-grounded enough then so much the worse for metaphysical reductionism. \
\
There is another point to make. Williams despairs of finding human nature, including human telos because he thinks such despair is demanded by biological science. But Hursthouse's response to Williams is that his worry is not actually rooted in the progress of modern science. And she is right. Williams himself admits that "many of course have come to that conclusion before\'85 that human beings are to some degree a mess... for whom no form of life is likely to prove entirely satisfactory, either individually or socially."[@hursthouse1998virtue 261, quoting from Williams.] If many have come to that (philosophical) conclusion before, without the benefit of modern science, then it is a non sequitur to cite modern science as evidence for the philosophical conclusion. A condensed caricature of the argument:  "modern science is very advanced. Therefore life is absurd." \
\
Instead, Hursthouse points out, we should interpret Williams' worry as an expression of moral nihilism and despair. It may be a rational despair, but the rationality or irrationality cannot simply be read off the biological facts. Indeed, I shall pick up the theme of rational despair in a later chapter. For now I shall only say that Williams believes human nature is a mess *because* he believes no form of life is completely satisfactory for everyone. But cannot the ground and consequent be reversed? Doesn't that blade both ways? If one has hope that some form of life is or may be at least mostly satisfactory for at least some people, it makes sense to believe human nature even at its present state, mid-evolutionary process, is not *completely* a mess. If one looks to exemplary human animals who demonstrate how to live admirable and wise and just lives, even mixed with suffering or tragedy, then perhaps, even if their lives are not *completely* satisfactory, one has a sort of existential evidence that life can be *somewhat* satisfactory. And Hursthouse movingly praises hope as a virtue.\
\
>Alternatively (or perhaps as well) we could stick with what we have\'97those facts about human nature and the way human life goes that support the claim that the virtues on the standard list benefit their possessor, and the reading of human history that ascribes our persisting failure to achieve *eudaimonia* in anything but very small patches to our vices. True, it is not easy to hold on to them sometimes; despair and misanthropy are temptations. But we should.[@hursthouse1998virtue 265]\
\
For my part, I should not like to deny that human society and many, many human individuals are indeed "a mess" in one sense. Humans are a "mess" in the sense that corruption is a real feature of human life. A selected list of the dark side of our species: War, oppression, disease, genetic defect, injury, hatred, vice, a large (and ever growing) list of different kinds of injustice. These, also, are empirical facts of anthropology and psychology. I should not like to deny that *things are bad*. I should only like to make space for the possibility that things *are not all bad*. The universal optimist is obliged unrealistically to deny all the dark side of our existence. But the universal pessimist is obliged unrealistically to deny all the light side: peace and freedom, glowing health, genetic order, beauty that persists into old age, love, virtue, and the halting but admirable efforts toward justice and social harmony.  In short, the human race is quite a mixed bag. But this is all too grand and sweeping for present purposes. The only question in this section is whether the universal characteristics of human nature can be hypothesized and confirmed. \
\
Below I shall make the case that specific ethical conclusions can be derived from natural facts about human beings. Here I only wish to make room for the possibility that our data set of such facts cannot with integrity include all light and sweetness nor all dank and dark cynicism. \
\
\
A third iteration of the "no human nature" objection is that if there is such thing as "human nature", it is nothing more or less than our biological and physiological makeup. Tim Lewens argues that "the only biologically respectable notion of human nature that remains is an extremely permissive one that names the reliable dispositions of the human species as a whole. This conception offers no ethical guidance..."[@lewens2012human] \
\
On Lewens' view, the only talk about our "nature" that would be scientific would be an indeterminate series of complicated stories about our genetics, evolutionary history, and neurophysiology, perhaps even including cultural, geographical, and ecological settings. The problem, as we have seen, is that an empirical "scientific" conception of human nature has nothing to do with *ethics*. All of the complicated stories we could tell -- if they are genuinely scientific -- would be purely *descriptive*.[Cf. @hursthouse1998virtue chapter 10; @brown2008virtue chapter 5; @ward2013against] \
\
Bernard Williams expresses a similar point. He says that nature has bestowed upon us an "ill-sorted bricolage of powers and instincts": \
\
>[the problem] lies not in the particular ways in which human beings may have evolved, but simply in the fact that they have evolved, and by natural selection... On that [evolutionary] view it must be the deepest desire \'97 need?\'97 purpose? \'97 satisfaction? \'97  of human beings to live in the way that is in this objective sense appropriate to them (the fact that modern words break up into these alternatives expresses the modern break\uc0\u8208 up of Aristotle's view).\
\
This is also Fitzpatrick's main worry, not that we have evolved poorly, but that we evolved at all.[@sepmoralitybiology] He argues that evolved organisms have a telos to reproduce, not to "flourish".  "\'93If, however, natural functions and ends in living things are structured by special relations established through the process of evolution through natural selection, i.e., non-incidental relations between traits and a special subset of their effects that figured into the selection process, then natural teleology will not ultimately or generally be about the welfare or flourishing of organisms (FitzPatrick 2000).\'94\
\
Stephen Brown is ambivalent but seems to think that ethics is, in the end, a descriptive discipline; even virtue ethics, after being appropriately "naturalized", does not *commend* the virtues so much as *detail* the traits which happen to be adaptive for creatures like us to survive and propagate our genotype.[@brown2008virtue; @brown2005really] \
\
Although the "characteristic form of life" of human beings involves highly rarified neurological and cognitive processes we do not observe in other animals, nevertheless, nature only reveals one kind of biological concept of nature: a species. And species aim to survive and reproduce. \
\
This objection is certainly relevant. Lewens, Fitzpatrick, and Brown urge that human nature, if it is anything, is simply to reproduce and propagate one's genotype. We are mammals, after all, and the telos of mammals is to reproduce. But this objection begs the question. We are animals, certainly. That is an empirical assertion, as I have been at pains to show. We exhibit quite a sufficient number of tell-tale properties shared by other mammals: a neocortex, hair, mammary glands, and hearts of a particular form and function. But we are also animals of a peculiar sort. That is, we are rational animals. From what we observe of ourselves both "from inside" and "from outside" we exhibit a range of properties not shared by other mammals: grammar and language, fire-making, cooking, sex for pleasure, abstract reasoning, science, philosophy, religion, mythology, agriculture. But to say that humans are *merely* mammals is an anti-empirical assertion that requires denying all this. In light of our status as practical, rational animals, it seems obvious to most people that reproduction is not our only natural telos. Reproduction is certainly *one* of our natural ends. "Human beings reproduce" is an instance of a broader natural generic truth, "organisms survive and reproduce." Human reproduction as a generic pattern is compatible with exceptions: The celibate, the pre-pubescent, the single, the infertile couple, the homosexual couple, and others do not reproduce. Nevertheless it may be true that humans reproduce (like every other organism). It may even be true that if, *as a species*, we ceased to reproduce, something would have gone wrong. That individual members of the species do not reproduce is not an automatic sign of defect; that the entire species has ceased (by choice or by injury or illness) to reproduce might be a sign of defect.[^83]\
\
[^83]: The "Voluntary Human Extinction Movement" is an example of a group who find the reasons for reproduction *as a species* to be on balance outweighed by the reasons for ceasing to reproduce.  Two comments: first, on first impression, VHEMT strikes most people as satire. It is a laughable movement. It is not necessarily mistaken, but it is certainly laughable. Secondly, VHEMT acknowledges the prima facie force of the need to reproduce. They argue that that need is outweighed. So in that they think species-wide reproduction is a default natural norm, we agree.\
\
I said that classifying reproduction as the end of humanity is obviously a mistake. This may only be "obvious" from within the practical point of view. It is obvious nonetheless. It is even obvious to Lewens, Fitzpatrick, and Brown (although Brown's faith wavers). Their point in bringing up reproduction is that we need something *more* than our natural teleology to capture the distinctively human rational process of deliberately defining teleological goals. That something more is "the practical point of view", the point of view from within human subjectivity, the \
\
The idea that natural teleological facts about human nature can only be known "within" some particular point of view is an important one, and I shall have to address it in a later chapter. For now I shall only say that slippery spatial analogies like "inside" and "outside" admit of multiple senses: "inside" can and often does mean what can be known via introspection (e.g., the way I know what it feels like to be slighted or to be praised, the way I remember the color of my grandmother's house) and what can be known from accepting limitations of a first-personal or second-personal human point of view more generally (e.g., it appears that the sun orbits the earth rather than the other way around; and I know when my mother is upset because I just "know" that look). Looking at things from the "outside" might mean what can be known via sensory perception or what can be known -- if anything -- by pretending to a neutral, objective, third-person, God's eye view. We can posit counterfactuals, as for example when we speculate what intelligent extraterrestrials would think of humans if they observed and studied our species, with fresh eyes, alongside every other. All that matters for my purposes now is that our species exhibits a range of peculiar activities that distinguish us from mammals, from animals more broadly, and from any other known natural entity in the cosmos -- and that recognizing as much is an *empirical* matter. To deny our uniqueness is rationally possible, after a long inquiry. But to be blind to our uniqueness from the outset is to be subject, in all likelihood, to philistine reductionism that has little to do with genuine scientific thinking. \
\
\
### Our nature is unknown \
\
A second objection might come from someone who simply urged that human nature is mysterious. For all we can tell (without the benefit of divine revelation) humanity is an anomaly. Our origin is shrouded in mystery, our destiny undecided. \
\
The main thesis of this chapter has been that the following generic is true: "human beings are practical, rational primates." This generic, I have argued, is defensible both philosophically and scientifically. It is discoverable both by humans examining our species from "within" the human point of view and by alien anthropologists examining our species from "outside" the human point of view (so long as they too were intelligent and rational). This generic picks out a property or set of properties we might describe as 'human nature.' \
\
The final objection that our origin and destiny are mysterious is true but misses the point. That humans are practical rational primates is not supposed to provide complete, comprehensive knowledge of our species. It is a minimal starting point of knowledge upon which to build. Knowing that snakes are legless reptiles is not an end to the scientific inquiry, but a beginning. Indeed, one cannot know about snakes unless one knows, roughly, what snakes are. So capturing the genus and differentiam of a kind of organism is in fact necessary for creating a conceptual placeholder *on which to attach new knowledge*. Knowing what human beings are, however roughly, gives us a concept-category within which to fill in the depth and breadth of facts and information. \
\
\
\
### Knowing from "Inside" Human Point of View\
\
A third objection states that are no objective properties obtaining in each and every human *which can be known from the objective, external, scientific point of view.* Perhaps some universal intersubjective properties, like a desire for belonging, obtain in all human beings who have conscious experiences. Even so, these can only be known "from within" the practical point of view and so would not count as "scientific" in a narrow sense. \
\
Those properties that can be known externally would be irrelevant. If by being practical reasoners we are free of the tyranny of biology, then biology is irrelevant to morality.  Hursthouse assumes that knowledge of humanity "from the outside" is useless or futile. She says, "Ethical naturalism is not to be construed as the attempt to ground ethical evaluations in a scientific account of human nature."[@hursthouse1998virtue especially chapter 10] She emphatically *does* mean to make evaluations of human beings can be made in a way analogous to the way we evaluate cacti or deer.  In each case we rely on the notion of natural kinds and their appropriate way of behaving:\
\
>[I]n relation to which they are evaluated as good or defective. The evaluations do not\'97as they might in a post\uc0\u8208 Darwinian age\'97evaluate members of species of living things simply as good, or not so good, or downright defective, as replicators of their genes.[@hursthouse1998virtue 257-8]\
\
Hursthouse and McDowell's alternative is to base ethical considerations on our nature as rational agents. This is still loosely naturalistic, in that we are talking about "human nature" or "second nature". This objection will be picked up in a later chapter. \
\
\
## Conclusion\
\
\
I have said that the generic truths about the human life form, if we can pinpoint them, would be of momentous importance for ethics for we could identify some human norms that are universal across every member of our species, regardless of culture and upbringing. \
\
Both "practical rationality" and "primate" entail a cluster of concepts. To be a primate is to be an animal that is alive and so on. This is what we have in common with all of organic nature. Mautner continues: "Life is a process whose outcome is the self-reproduction of complex molecular patterns\'92. Importantly, Life is then a process that requires a constant flow of information, matter and energy."[@mautner2009life 435] That process of life on earth has been a continuous one, throughout time, since the first origins of life on the planet. Furthermore, we are not just "living beings" but primates belonging to a wider class of mammals. We come to be in similar ways as other mammals, have similar needs for oxygen, food, society, warmth, exercise, and sleep. And to be a common life form entails that each of us begins life in roughly the same way, need the same range of nutrients to grow and survive, and deserve the same respect. \
\
To be a practical rational primate means that something changes when we examine human beings compared to all other animals or all other natural kinds.[@hawley2011natural] We are not just animals but practical rational primates. This entails the emergence of a new set of capacities: abstract thought, speech, sociality, rational practice, and creativity. So, we can predict that just as the scientist  evaluates members of a species by how well or badly it exemplifies its particular life form, human beings are evaluable by how well or badly they exemplify their particular  life form. We continue to evaluate humans on the basis of their species, but we evaluate not just their health and normal developmental stages, and their maturity, but their *actions*. \
\
Michael Thompson summarizes: \
\
>... we may view this line of thought as beginning with the idea... that will and practical reason are on the face of it just two more faculties or powers a living being may bear, on a level with the powers of sight and hearing an memory. The second crucial thought is that an individual instance of any of the latter powers \'97 sight, hearing, memory \'97 is intuitively to be judged as defective or sound, good or bad, well-working or ill-working, by reference to its bearer's life-form or kind or species.[@thompson2008life 29]\
\
The good-of-a-kind for our species is not *only* about practical reasoning, but also about animality. For example, starving to death, or being born without limbs, or being unable to reproduce is a bad-of-a-kind for creatures like us (not a moral bad, of course, but a real misfortune). So an exemplary member of our species would have to exemplify a whole range of good properties. \
\
The sort of naturalism(s) represented by Foot, Hursthouse, and McDowell aim to ground evaluations of a member of a species on the life form of that species. The generic that 'a human being is a practical, rational animal' captures the life form of the species in a manner that is accessible to an "alien anthropologist" observing humanity from the "outside", from outside the practical point of view. The presence in humanity of such generically animal behaviors such as birthing, reproducing sexually, eating, sleeping, and dying betray a common root and identity with the animal kingdom and with the biological world as a whole; yet other human behaviors, especially language, deliberation, reflection, and intentional action betray a curious difference. As such, those qualities that enable human beings to be practical, rational animals are liable to turn out to be virtues. Those qualities of natural excellence enable the member of the species to actuate the potentials inherent in such a life form. Showing how such qualities as show up on "normal" catalog of virtues, and how perhaps even others, fall under the concept of natural excellence, is the task for the next chapter. \
\
\
}