{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 A double danger\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 My goal is not to write from within my tradition as a theist and indeed a Christian. The resources available for thinking about virtue are much greater. Rather, if the church to which I belong is a citadel on the hill, and the broader western tradition is a city spread out like a wheel on the surrounding terrain, my goal is to leave the citadel and see how much work can be done in the city. Outside the city, of course, are the villages, towns, and countryside homes. And beyond that, wilderness. I shall not have much to say to the wild men who are utter moral strangers. \
The double danger of limiting myself to what can be said about virtue and nature from within a public and secular tradition is that both audiences are liable to misunderstand me: fellow theists or fellow Christians in particular may assume that I ignore the extra resources available to me out of disbelief or ignorance; fellow westerners who do belong or might belong to the tradition of Aristotle will assume that I consider the more narrow domain of secular discourse as a means of proselytizing for my faith, inching towards God. Both sides may think me either disingenuous or misguided. This is a danger that can be mitigated by explicit avowals of my true intentions. But such misunderstandings cannot be wholly guarded against. I think the reward is worth the risk. To detail neo-Aristotelianism and to give a novel account of naturalism that both theists and atheists or agnostics can consider, modify, and in part accept, is worth all the trouble. \
}