{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red102\green102\blue102;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Philippa Foot, 
\i Natural Goodness
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 Overview:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Goodness is \'91intrinsic\'92 or \'91natural\'92 to species-types. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Synopsis\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf2 Introduction\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 The book is crude but that\'92s the only way we shall get on (2). \
We could start with \'91pleasure is good\'92 like Moore did, but that is wrong since the predicate has a different logical function (2-3) \'97 good always means good 
\i for someone. 
\i0 \
Goodness is \'91natural goodness and defect in living things\'92 (3). \
\
Good and red are different.\
The house is beautiful (doesn\'92t need complement)\
The house is useful (needs complement \'97 for a mom of six). \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf2 A fresh start?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \'93One finds its deepest roots in David Hume...\'94 (6). \'93This is the subjectivism \'97 often called \'91non-cognitivism\'92 \'97 that came to the fore with A. J. Ayer, C. L. Stevenson, and Richard Hare, informed the work of John Mackie and many others, and has lately appeared, refreshed, in Alan Gibbard\'92s \'91expressivist\'92 account of normative language. Simon Blackburn, reviewing Gibbard\'92s 
\i Wise Choices, Apt Feelings, 
\i0 has said that he hopes this book will now set the agenda for moral philosophy\'94 (5). \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\i \cf0 Meaning was thus to be explained in terms of a speaker\'92s attitude, intentions, or state of mind. 
\i0 And this opened up a gap between moral judgments and assertions... Fact, complementary to assertion, had been distinguished from value, complementary to the expression of feeling, attitude, or commitment to action (8).
\i \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\i0 \cf0 \
\'93Their theories were devised to take account of something that really is a feature of moral judgment: the \'91action-guiding\'92 character of morality, which Hume had insisted on and taken as the foundation of his moral philosophy. Morality, Hume had said, is necessarily practical, serving to produce and prevent action, and I shall call this \'91Hume\'92s practicality requirement.\'92 Emotivism satisfies the requirement in the wrong way. (9). \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Reflections\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 She is working with Anscombe, since she is a student of hers and also an admirer. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf2 On the history of subjectivism \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \'93One finds its deepest roots in David Hume...\'94 (6). \'93This is the subjectivism \'97 often called \'91non-cognitivism\'92 \'97 that came to the fore with A. J. Ayer, C. L. Stevenson, and Richard Hare, informed the work of John Mackie and many others, and has lately appeared, refreshed, in Alan Gibbard\'92s \'91expressivist\'92 account of normative language. Simon Blackburn, reviewing Gibbard\'92s 
\i Wise Choices, Apt Feelings, 
\i0 has said that he hopes this book will now set the agenda for moral philosophy\'94 (5). \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf2 On practical rationality\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \'93(A) Reasons for acting, which we may call practical reasons.\
(B) Reasons for believing, which we may call evidential or demonstrative reasons.\
As philosophers, and therefore theoreticians, our job is of course to 
\i give 
\i0 the second type of reason, arguing for or against the truth of a variety of propositions that seem to involve special problems\'97 like those, for instance, about personal identity or the existence of the external world. But among these many \'91philosophical\'92 subjects we find that of the nature of practical reasons, and in this special case we shall have to give reasons of type B for theses about reasons of type A.\'94 (64)\
}