{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat143\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Robert Audi, The Rationality and the Good\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 Overview:\
Synopsis:\
Reflections:\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri220\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \'93A child is born. It is immediately immersed in sensation and greeted with discomfort. It is relieved by fondling and feeding. It experiences touch and taste, hearing and sight, scent and movement. The earliest sensations are doubtless blurry. But soon, discrimination begins. This is a differential responsiveness to experiences. The child reaches out for milk, smiles at Mama, cries from loud noises.\
It is not clear when the first beliefs are formed. Their formation is facilitated by discrimination, but belief-formation is not entailed by discrimination. Belief requires understanding. Whereof one cannot understand, thereof one cannot believe. Understanding, in turn, requires concepts. Concepts arise in interlocking formations. Beliefs do not arise in isolation either, one doxastic atom at a time. Like concepts, they are formed, and work, in families.\
We are blessed not only with a receptiveness to learning from experience but also with a capacity to learn from what we already know. One route to learning is generalization: if a small yelping dog jumps at a child, the child expects much the same of a big one. Another, overlapping, route to learning is inference. Inference, too, appears early in life. We infer certain consequences of some of the things we believe. A child told that the family cannot have animals needs no logical prowess to infer that the puppy offered by neighbors will not be accepted. We also make inferences to the best explanation. The same child may infer from canine squeals at the door that the puppy is outside.\'94 (Robert Audi, 
\i Rationality and the Good, 
\i0 p. 3). \
}