{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
For Wielenburg, the emergence of the capacity to recognize moral rights coincides with the emergence of moral rights. He assumes that we have certain beliefs about personal space and the wrongness of transgressing personal space. You may not torture me for fun, I may not torture you \'a0for fun. The fact that it is wrong supervenes on my cognitivefaculties, the same faculties with which I recognizeThe fact that it is wrong. Wielenburg argument parallels the argument of Robert George that our moral rights are grounded in our rational nature. Having a rational nature entails having certain rights; having a rational nature entails the capacity (realized or not) to develop the ability to recognize that all creatures with rational natures (both ourselves and others) have rights. (Wielenburg, 
\i On Evolutionary Debunking Arguments 
\i0 %) \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl320
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\fs28 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \

\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Joyce gives a debunking argument that amounts to a question begging analogy. Joyce commits the fallacy of Bulverism. He assumes his opponent is wrong and instead of getting arguments to that effect explains why his opponent came to believe such a falsehood.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl320
\cf0 \
	Two questions for Wielenburg are these: do animals not have any rights? And is there any evolutionary explanation for the emergence of cognitive capacities by which we recognize moral rights, a rational nature?\
}