{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Chapter 1 Introduction\

\b0 \
Annas aims to \'93produce an account of virtue\'94 (1). Though there has been a revival of interest in virtue, not all accounts agree. \
Annas\'92 account attends to two interrelated ideas: \'93exercising a virtue involves practical reasoning of a kind that can illuminatingly be compared to the kind of reasoning we find in someone exercising a practical skill\'94 (1); and \'93virtue is part of the agent\'92s happiness or flourishing, and that it is possible to see virtue as actually constituting (wholly or in part) that happiness. \
The first idea is sometimes called the \'93skill analogy\'94, though it may not be an analogy at all but an identity. \
Annas \'93plunges into developing\'94 her theory of virtue as skill and virtue as at least partially constitutive of eudaemonia (happiness or flourishing \'97 a term she clarifies later) since she believes \'93that these ideas are far more intuitive and empirically rooted than often assumed\'94 (2). Her theory is \'93holistic in structure; the different parts are mutually supportive\'94 (3). \
A response: Annas\'92 account reflects a truth I think is important: virtue theories are \'93bottom-up\'94 theories. John Arras distinguishes between \'93high moral theory\'94 (e.g., Kantian deontology, classical utilitarianism) which aspires to generalization, universality, abstractness, systematic organization, simplicity, and comprehensiveness and \'93common moral theory\'94 (e.g., casuistry, bioethical principlism, commonsense morality). Commonsense morality, \'93folk morality,\'94 is bottom-up. It takes as uncontroversial starting points certain brute and apparently obvious moral truths: murder is wrong; loyalty to family and friends is admirable; Joe is truly a hero; Jack is a slouch, a vagabond, a cad. \
Virtue theorists have been more or less interested in sublimating their ethical theory into high moral theory. \
\

\b \
Chapter 2 Virtue, character, disposition\

\b0 By the time we are old enough to reflect on morality, our moral characters are already at least partially formed. \

\b \
Chapter 3 Skilled and virtuous action\
\
Chapter 4 The scope of virtue\
\
Chapter 5 Virtue and enjoyment\
\
Chapter 6 Virtues and the  unity of virtue\
\
Chapter 7 Virtue and goodness\
\
Chapter 8 Living happily \
\
Julia Annas\'92 discussion of happiness\
\

\b0 Happiness is an indeterminate concept. This judgment of indeterminacy is, in some books, a critique (Brown 2008; Hoffe 2006). But indeterminacy is a necessary and salutary feature of the concept. In Aristotle\'92s account, the indeterminacy of 
\i eudaemonia 
\i0 allows it to serve as the global telos of each human being and of human beings as a natural kind. \
\
The internal connection between virtue and happiness has seemed \'93profoundly unlikely\'94 to philosophers of the last two hundred years or so (Annas 2011, 119). \
\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93She argues that exercising a virtue involves practical reasoning of the kind we find in someone exercising an everyday practical skill, such as farming, building, or playing the piano. This helps us to see virtue as part of an agent's happiness or flourishing.\'94 (Author\'92s abstract)\
\
Chapter 9 Living virtuously, living happily\
\
Chapter 10 Conclusion}