{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green26\blue26;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi720\sl288\slmult1\sa200\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Return of the Virtues
\b0 \
Virtue talk is astonishingly enduring. It is almost old as human history yet as cutting edge as any philosophical fad. \
Virtue talk lost purchase during the heady days of the Enlightenment and post-Enlightenment, especially in western Europe and North America. Yet \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
in the last 60 years in analytic philosophy, virtue ethics has achieved a kind of ascendancy. According to the Chalmers survey, 18% (almost a fifth) of analytic philosophers are virtue ethicists, with only 25% and 23% avowing deontology or consequentialism respectively. (The rest were \'93other.\'94)\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
Even so, the contemporary virtue ethicist who thinks virtue talk is indispensable has challengers on every front. \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Within virtue ethical conversations, what exact doctrines "virtue ethics" is supposed to entail is far from clear. \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Then there are normative ethical challenges from deontologists, utilitarians, relativists, and moral skeptics. Most broadly, \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
the foundations of virtue ethics are still largely unexplored. \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 There are metaethical challenges from anti-realists, constructivists, non-cognitivists.\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi720\sl288\slmult1\sa200\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Ethics and Metaethics: Virtue and Foundation of Virtue
\b0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi720\sl288\slmult1\sa200\pardirnatural
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
According to some philosophers, (second-order) metaethical theories like cognitivism and non-cognitivism are neutral with respect to (first-order) normative theories like consequentialism or virtue ethics. \'a0And yet, one's conclusions about metaethical foundations do bear natural relations to specific ethical theories. Moore's 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Principia, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
a metaethical source text, is consequentialist, and many naturalist realists (like Boyd and Railton) and even non-cognitivists (like Mackie) are consequentialists. Non-naturalists tend to be realists (like Shaffer-Lanau) and divine command theorists (like Robert Adams) or deontologists (like Kant, who is a non-naturalist with respect to ethics if not metaphysics).\'a0\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
No one to my knowledge has attempted to wed non-cognitivism with virtue talk. \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
An adequate philosophical ethics cannot divorce ethical and metaethical concerns for long (Darwall 2006). The very notion of divorcing ethical questions about what is good from metaethical questions about what the term \'91good\'92 means is a modern notion, dating to G. E. Moore\'92s (1903) proud proclamation (and I paraphrase) that every ethicist before him had failed clearly to define terms. But virtue ethicists pre-existed the modern metaethical conversation and will not accommodate its demand to keep formal and material ethical questions separate. \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	So how might the core commitments of virtue ethics affect one's conclusion about metaethical foundations? The virtue ethicist is committed, minimally, to virtue talk, to the conceptual definition of virtue as somehow beneficial (Hursthouse). Also, she is committed to notions of practical wisdom (Annas). Although some are not eudaimonists (Stephen Brown), traditional virtue ethics is committed to the notion that happiness is the telos of human life or at least that human life has a telos (MacIntyre).\'a0\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 For philosophical ethics, a criterion is that an ethical theory exemplify both theoretical and practical virtues. A good theory must be both abstract and pragmatic. It is a tall order to demand that a theory match our overall world-picture and be adequate to explain a wide range of phenomena in our ethical lives \'97 but even that is not enough. The theory must also be useful to us, help us in dilemmas, be a map by which we navigate difficult transitions. And an ethical theory that appeals to virtues and vices can do just that. \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi720\sl288\slmult1\sa200\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 To that end, my plan is to examine six virtue ethicists to build an adequate virtue theory that also pays due attention to abstract metaethical challenges, questions, and objections about realism and idealism, naturalism and theism. \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
It would be impossible or perhaps foolhardy for me to attempt a full treatment. Instead, 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
I work toward this end
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 by examining six influential virtue ethicists to discover their positions (if any) on these metaethical debates, and the strengths and weaknesses of their metaethical positions. Those six virtue ethicists are: Alasdair MacIntyre, Philippa Foot, Rosalind Hursthouse, John McDowell, Stephen Brown, and Robert Adams. \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0  \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
These six writers are exemplars whom I take to be representative of particular tradition or sub-sets of a particular tradition. That tradition is rooted explicitly in Aristotle and the medieval Aristotelians (like Aquinas) but critiques, extends, and otherwise modifies the orthodox Aristotelian doctrine (especially that laid out in the 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Nicomachean Ethics
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
).\
\

\b Brief Outline
\b0 \
In the first section, I shall \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
briefly review the virtue theory of Aristotle and the historical ascendancy of the Aristotelian virtue tradition in the English-speaking philosophy (via Elizabeth Anscombe, Peter Geach, and others). I situate virtue ethics within modern moral philosophy alongside deontology, consequentialism, and divine command theory. I also situate neo-Aristotelian naturalism within metaethical context of other moral naturalisms. \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	In the second section, I give a chapter to my six writers. \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
For each writer, we shall ask a set of core normative ethical questions. By asking the same questions of each writer we will build a clear picture of where this tradition has come from. \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 By examining each writer in turn, clarifying their view, critiquing, and (hopefully) correcting it, I may hope to extend that tradition, building an account of my own. \
	In the third section, \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 I present my own contribution. I synthesize what I take to be what is correct in each of these thinkers and reject what I take to be faulty or implausible, building (or beginning) an account that constitutes a metaethical foundation of virtue. \'a0This synthesis shows that seemingly disparate notions actually gather themselves into 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
two
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 coherent and competing accounts. Both of which are non-reductive, morally realist accounts, but differ especially with respect to the metaphysical status of nature, God, and human nature. Finally, I articulate the theoretical costs and benefits of each in light of the broader debate between theism and metaphysical naturalism.}