{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf110
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### Virtue ###\
\
A discussion of MacIntyre\'92s conception of virtue must tell a story that grows more complex as it proceeds. He builds an account of virtue in three successive stages: personal, social, and traditional. Rather than attempt to encapsulate all three stages at once, it is wiser for us to retell his story in the same order. \
\
His first definition of virtue is that virtues are \'93acquired human qualities that enable their possessor to achieve those goods which are internal to practices.\'94[@macintyre1984after 191] This is the first stage or layer of his final account of virtue in *After Virtue*. A few preliminary comments are in order about each phrase of this definition. \
\
First, virtues are *human* qualities, presumably opposed to analogous qualities of lower animals.  Formal or functional qualities that enable an animal to survive and thrive (i.e., the flexible flagellum of the bacterium, the swiftness of a deer) are excluded from the class of virtues by definition. Now, MacIntyre changes his mind on this point. *Dependent Rational Animals* will challenge *After Virtue*\'92s presumed opposition between human and non-human animals. \
\
Secondly, virtues are acquired. Meno asked Socrates whether virtues are "whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice; or if neither by teaching nor practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"[@plato, *Meno* 70a] MacIntyre's answer is not that virtue is a gift of the gods, but that it is acquired. This is important because, as a recent volume edited by Mark Alfano[@alfano2015current] discusses, one important question for virtue ethicists is the range of what positive traits count as virtues. MacIntyre, it would seem, limits the range to exclude inborn or genetically determined qualities like a good memory or excellent eyesight from being considered virtues. \
\
Thirdly, virtues enable the achievement of *goods.* Virtues here seem to be defined instrumentally. A misunderstanding lurks in the vicinity. Virtues *are* instrumental for MacIntyre, but they are not *merely* instrumental. They are both  instrumental to the achievement of certain goods and also partly constitutive of those goods. Virtues are means to an end and also ends in themselves. Phronesis or practical wisdom, for example, enables agents to make good decisions that result in greater happiness and thriving as a human being. But also having phronesis *just is part of the definition* of being a thriving human being. \
\
Now, this refusal to treat the means/end distinction as clean and absolute is liable to cause his critics to misunderstand his position. As Charles Taylor points out:\
\
>It is a feature of many modern theories... that they cannot abide this kind of relation, in which one element is both cause and constituent of another. It is a central demand of one influential construal of modern reason that one clearly sort out means from ends. For utilitarians, the good is happiness, and virtues can only be good instrumentally... If the basic point of morality is to do the right actions, then the virtues must be seen as purely executive. They cannot also be seen as part of the end, because the end is not defined that way.[@taylor 25] \
\
This worry exposes deep fault lines that we must return to below. For now, we will set them aside. \
\
Fourthly, MacIntyre defines virtues with reference to the goods internal to *practices*. Practice remains a key term for MacIntyre's ethical thought. To misunderstand the term of art 'practice' would be to misunderstand MacIntyre. So we must also elaborate on this concept and the concept of \'93internal goods\'94 which is attached to it in this first definition. \
\
In the following sub-sections, I\'92ll build up the remaining two stages of MacIntyre\'92s final account of virtue by elaborating on three key components: practice, self, and tradition.}