{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 # Alasdair MacIntyre: Virtue in Practice \
\
### Introduction ###\
\
Alasdair MacIntyre (born 1929) is an influential moral and political philosopher. His eighteen books and greater than three hundred published articles have indelibly impacted analytic ethics and several other fields. MacIntyre embodies the ideal Roy Sellars commended, that philosophers \'93should be well-grounded both in the history of philosophy and in the sciences, and that the philosopher should engage philosophically with the major moral, social, and political issues of the day.\'94[@mcdonoughroy] Refusing to restrict himself to a single topic, MacIntyre has contributed to virtue ethics, communitarianism, the history of philosophy, political science, epistemology, the philosophy of education; but he has contributed to other fields outside philosophy strictly defined, including sociology and literary analysis. Refusing to restrict himself to a strict style, his work often draws on sociology, psychology, and literature for its themes and illustrations, such as the memorable picture he paints of emotivism as not merely a theory of moral language but a \'93culture\'94 with its own paradigmatic \'93characters\'94, the Manager and the Therapist.[@macintyre1984after chapter 3] His long career has been characterized by a long evolution within and across various schools of thought. He has adjusted (and in some cases, retracted) his affiliations. For example, he began his career as a Marxist, before \'93converting\'94 to Aristotelianism, and most recently \'93converting\'94 to Christianity and Thomism. He denies the labels \'93virtue ethicist\'94 and \'93communitarian,\'94 despite his contributions to both fields, rather preferring to be thought of simply as a \'91philosopher\'92 and a Thomist. But he is still writing and still thinking. Those who familiar with the expansiveness of his research will not be too quick to declare that his evolution is finished.\
\
In spite of (or perhaps because of) this multifaceted oeuvre, MacIntyre has had enormous and interdisciplinary influence. Weinstein observes that Macintyre did for ethics what Rawls did for political philosophy. Rawls re-invigorated political philosophy, \'93inaugurating the dominance of late twentieth-century liberalism. Hundreds, if not thousands of articles have responded to Rawls\'92 work, and the rest of the century saw a flood of books on every nuance of liberal theory.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 38] MacIntyre re-invigorated ethical philosophy by attending to its history.[@weinstein2003macintyre chapter 4.] \
\
### Two main themes: history and practical reason\
\
The full significance of his legacy remains to be seen. I shall offer some tentative predictions at the end of this chapter. Yet two of his most oft-recurring thematic points have had widespread impact: the first is that ethical terms, concepts, and judgments have *a history*. That is, we can only responsibly use or evaluate our own ethical (and more broadly, evaluative) terms, concepts, and judgments when we have some historical perspective on them. We must know ourselves as members of a \'93tradition\'94, that is, a historically-extended social community with its own conceptual resources. A second thematic point is that moral reasoning is a species of practical reasoning *tout court*. That is, moral reasoning is not a special, mystical discipline divorced from prudential, instrumental, and other kinds of practical reasoning. We can only build a clear, coherent, and comprehensive theory of the good if simultaneous we are building a theory of rationality itself. Together, these two themes have guided MacIntyre\'92s conclusions. \
\
His commitments to thinking through ethical concepts in tandem with concepts of rationality, and thinking through both in historical/traditional perspective lead him to endorse a set of specific conclusions. Three of those conclusions will be our theme in this chapter. \
\
I would like to give a cursory statement the primary conclusions under discussion. The first is that we are members of the tradition of liberalism, modernity, the Enlightenment. That slippery word 'we' should be taken, here, to refer to MacIntyre\'92s western, English-speaking or European readers.\
\
His second conclusion is that modern moral philosophy since the Enlightenment has gotten off track. Compared to the moral, social, and political unity of previous generations or of other cultures in our own time, the last several hundred years of modernity in the west have been a mix of good and bad, but the bad has been disastruous. In fact, philosophical ethics have become unintelligible. If morality is a set of rules, actions, or character traits that are admirable or praiseworthy, then intelligible morality cannot but exist within a nexus of two other concepts: human-nature-as-it-is (identified with help from psychology, sociology, etc.) *and* a conception of \'93human-nature-as-it-could-be-if-achieved-its-telos\'94. Our modern, liberal, Enlightenment tradition (which we shall explicate below) got off track, largely due to the attempt to banish *telos* or intrinsic purposes from morality. Opposition to teleology has rendered the virtues, moral duties, praiseworthy actions unintelligible. MacIntyre invites his readers, especially those who already, for independent reasons, find the modern liberal Enlightenment tradition fatally flawed, to give up on its hopeless elements. \
\
A third conclusion follows from the first two. The restoration of historical perspective and of thinking of ethical reasoning as a species of practical reasoning promises that the restoration of *telos* might make available resources of the older, Aristotelian tradition of virtue. The promise of such a restoration and recovery is immense. A conception of human nature as it is combined with a clear conception of the potential of human nature would lead to a restoration of moral intelligibility.  The restoration of *telos* would make morality intelligible again, which would undergird a restoration of social and political integrity. If the point of education, politics, and social life were once again the acquisition and exercise of virtues, these activities and pursuits would become intelligible in ways that many modern folk can hardly imagine. \
\
These conclusions are, of course, tersely put. Our job in this chapter is to unpack them. And these conclusions are subject to various important objections. Our job is to articulate and respond to (some of) them.\
\
But it is worth noting at the outset that these conclusions are as radical as they are popular. MacIntyre\'92s ideal audience is "small farmers, fishermen (and women), schoolteachers who refuse to become bureaucratic functionaries, those who retain ideals of craftsmanship in manual or mental labor and members of cooperatives aimed at remedying hunger or homelessness."[@weinstein2003macintyre 8.] In other words, he writes to academics and to regular folks; to individuals and to communities. And, to the surprise of some, his influence has been marked. \
Those who accept his invitation tend to be more dissatisfied with the present modern culture, modern morality, and modern politics. Such may find his solutions compelling. However, MacIntyre never writes in such a way as to seem to *compel* (neither by reason nor rhetoric) anyone to believe his theory. \
\
The invitation to recover the virtues of the tradition of Aristotle (and Aquinas and others) really is an *invitation* \'97 it is not a *demand.*  He does not *force* anyone to play by his rules, to accept his definitions of terms. Many have declined his invitation to restore the Aristotelian tradition of virtue. Those who decline tend to be more or less content with modern ethical and political thinking as it is. The changes they want to make are corrections and improvements, sometimes extensive changes, but nothing approaching an overhaul. Therefore, they tend to find  MacIntyre's criticisms excessively polemical and his solutions needlessly radical. He invites readers who are not discontent with modernity to self-reflect and to reflect on our common history. They may find something of interest in his criticisms. But even if there is nothing of interest in his criticisms and solutions, they are invited to consider his solutions in a spirit of philosophical imagination. "*If* modern morality were a disaster... would something like this be a good solution?"\
\
### Chapter outline\
\
The labor of this chapter is divided into four sections. \
\
**Section 1: Tradition and history**. Section 1 sets the foundation for MacIntyre\'92s theory of virtue and practical wisdom that he offers as a cure for what ills modern moral philosophy. First, I shall explain MacIntyre\'92s assumption that we moderns \'97 even putatively \'93anti-traditionalist\'94 moderns \'97 are part of a \'93tradition,\'94 and explicate his belief that our modern tradition is fatally flawed. I will tell part of MacIntyre\'92s personal history, his epistemological crises, that helps make sense of his eventual theories.\
\
**Section 2: Virtue**.  Section 2 summarizes and discusses MacIntyre\'92s theory of virtue as presented in his four main virtue books. I shall present his positive account of virtue in historical perspective. I shall also summarize the related supporting concepts that uphold this account of virtue: practices, the self and its narrative of human life, practical reason and human nature, *telos* and happiness, tradition and practical rationality. \
\
**Section 3: Objections**. Section 3 presents a sampling of the powerful objections critics have offered to various aspects of MacIntyre\'92s theory.  Also, I shall try to identify the main types of critic \'97 crudely put, they are modernists, postmodernists, and MacIntyre\'92s own fellow Thomists. While it will be impossible to do justice to the excellent replies from MacIntyre's sizable crowd of friends and opponents, I shall  focus on what three of what I take to be three families of superlatively important challenges. The first family of objections pertains to moral  relativism; many worry that MacIntyre has undercut any possibility of intelligibly defending the robust moral realism inherent to the Aristotelian tradition of virtue. The second family of objections pertains to rationality and tradition (which are inextricably related in MacIntyre\'92s work, as we shall see); some worry that his theory of rationality is plainly incoherent.  Others worry that it is coherent but that MacIntyre\'92s espousing of it *while* arguing his particular ethical conclusions amounts to a performative contradiction. The third family of objections pertains to teleology and the concept of telos; some worry that trying to shoehorn teleology back into ethics, even if it were desirable to do so, will require accepting tenets from a discredited Aristotelian metaphysics of nature; others argue that ethics can get along well enough without any need for *telos*. \
\
**Section 4: Discussion**. Section 4 discusses these various objections and considers whether  MacIntyre\'92s virtue theory contains the resources with which to answer them satisfactorily.  While I cannot claim to finally calm the worries of his critics, I argue that each of these three families of objections can be answered. His notion of virtue is not, at the end of the day, relativistic. I take 'relativism' to be a constellation of theses to the effect that no one person\'92s or culture\'92s conception of virtue is rationally superior to any other\'92s. Secondly, his notion of tradition-constituted rationality, while frustratingly open to interpretation (by philosophers from varying traditions!) is ultimately a powerful and useful framework with which to explain the paradoxical phenomena of widespread moral disagreement *alongside* widespread moral agreement. Thirdly, the needed type of teleology for MacIntyre\'92s proposed restoration of the Aristotelian tradition of virtue is credible within our context of modern science, so long as we carefully distinguish various possible types of \'91teleology\'92 (e.g., there are at least four: cosmic, metaphysical, biological, and social teleologies). With all that said, I shall argue that we should expect any \'93answer\'94 to such fundamental worries to expose deep metaphilosophical fault lines. So, I shall caution MacIntyre\'92s allies and enemies to be cautious about hastily labeling each other as \'93unphilosophical\'94 on the basis of an inability \'97 at the moment \'97 of finally adjudicating these disputes. I shall close this chapter with a reflection on why some find MacIntyre\'92s philosophical ethics so infuriating and easy to misunderstand. The same features of his theory that infuriate some magnetically fascinate others and so reflection on them may, I believe, illuminate MacIntyre\'92s distinctive legacy. \
\
## Tradition and history ##\
\
My first goal in this chapter is to make an adequate presentation MacIntyre's account of virtue. However, it would be unwise quickly to dive in to that presentation without two preliminaries. To see why, consider two of his early (and by no means final) formulations of a definition of virtue: First, he defines virtues as \'93acquired human qualities that enable their possessor to achieve those goods which are internal to practices.\'94[@macintyre1984after 191] And secondly:\
\
>The virtues find their point and purpose not only in sustaining those relationships necessary if the variety of goods internal to practices are to be achieved and not only in sustaining the form of an individual life in which that individual may seek out his or her good as the good of his or her whole life, but also in sustaining those traditions which provide both practices and individual lives with their necessary historical context.[@macintyre1984after 223]\
\
These formulations define virtue in terms of "practices" that an individual engages in throughout his or her "whole life", all in context of a "tradition". These three concepts -- practice, life, and tradition -- are constitutive pieces of MacIntyre's account of virtue. While discussions of *practice* and *life* can wait, I should be cutting off the Hydra\'92s immortal head if I were to explain *tradition* at the outset. Thankfully, a brief preliminary explanation will suffice for now. More details will emerge as they are needed.\
\
### We inhabit a tradition ###\
\
MacIntyre maintains that every inquirer inhabits a tradition. What does this mean? First we must take the point in its least controversial and hence most trivial sense that each inquirer is an embodied human being, living in a particular time and place, speaking (and perhaps thinking) within a given language, inquiring within a particular social setting. These trivia are not very interesting yet. But they are only the beginning.  \
\
What is a tradition? "A living tradition . . . is an historically extended, socially embodied argument\'85"[@macintyre1984after 222. He specifies that the content of the tradition is self-reflexive: "\'85  an argument precisely in part about the goods which constitute that tradition."] deriving from a source text and continuing across generations via normal sociological channels (schools, friendships, political institutions, etc.). So, for example, by MacIntyre's lights Judaism is a tradition rooted in a source text (the Tanakh) and continuing across generations through arguments carried out in synagogues, universities, and so on about how to best interpret and apply the Tanakh and later commentaries. Augustinianism is a tradition rooted in the Holy Bible and Augustine's corpus, consisting in socially-embedded arguments over how to best interpret and apply Augustine; history-writing is a tradition, rooted in source texts such as Herodotus, and Thucydides, Gibbon and extending through Europe and the western world, consisting of a series of historical and historiographical arguments over not just "what happened" but how to define history, how to conduct historical enquiry. \
\
With all this said, MacIntyre assumes that "we" inhabit a tradition. Some readers may object: Do \'93we\'94 (Anglo-Americans in particular or westerners in general) inhabit a \'93tradition\'94 at all? MacIntyre argues that we do. What tradition is it supposed to be? It is variously titled: liberalism, modern liberalism, modernity, Enlightenment modernity. (Liberalism does not correlate to the contemporary political division between \'93conservatives\'94 and \'93liberals.\'94 Rather, liberalism in this sense encompasses both contemporary \'93liberals\'94 and \'93conservatives\'94.) For simplicity, in most instances I shall use the simple term \'91modernity\'92 or \'91Enlightenment modernity\'92 to describe this tradition. \
\
In the (1990) Gifford Lectures, MacIntyre presented three rival versions of moral inquiry as expressions of three rival traditions.[@macintyre1990three] A book was later made of these lectures. Richard Forty wrote that the book \'93deepens and defends MacIntyre\'92s claim that genuinely rational enquiry requires membership in a particular type of moral community. He offers the most persuasive recent restatement of the Thomist position on the relation of metaphysics to morality.\'94 What are the \'93three rival versions\'94? He labels them \'91genealogy,\'92 \'91encyclopedia\'92, and \'91tradition\'92. Now, the use of the single word \'91tradition\'92 to mean both the genus (with three species) *and* one of those three species is deadly confusing, so I propose to call the third tradition Thomism. \
\
The three are defined by their respective attitudes toward the past. Genealogists use the past to subvert and \'93debunk\'94 the present. Encyclopedists use the present to denigrate and \'93debunk\'94 the past. Thomists use the past as a basis for building upon and yet transcending the past. Genealogists think, in advance, that no one in the future can use the present as a foundation. Encyclopedists think, in advance, that no one in the future will ever be able to transcend the present; they think \'93we have arrived.\'94 Thomists think, in advance, that those in the future will use the present as a foundation for building upon and yet transcending the present. The genealogist par excellence is Frederich Nietzsche, though Foucault and Derrida get honorable mention. The encyclopedist par excellence is the ninth edition of the *Encyclopedia Brittanica* and to Adam Lord Gifford (1820\'961887) himself. Gifford was a senator of the College of Justice in Scotland and inaugurated these prestigious lectures to represent the \'93state of the art\'94 of all knowledge. As for the *Britannica*, one reviewer put the point this way: \'93The *Britannica* represents the idea of an impersonal, universal, tradition-free conception of rational enquiry into morals, telling a story of the progress of reason in philosophy an the sciences through an appeal to timeless, universal principles of rationality. The encyclopedic tradition holds moral enquiry to be about an autonomous, distinct realm of human life, which can and must be understood solely in its own terms." For reasons we shall discuss, MacIntyre thinks this version of rational enquiry is doomed. Nevertheless "it still exercises an extraordinary influence on contemporary thought and on university curricula."[@pinkard1991three] \
\
Now, modernity is an encyclopedic tradition. I was educated in a modern university on modern fare, as were my readers (I presume). So, by MacIntyre\'92s lights, we are \'93encyclopedists.\'94 Our source texts are Hume, Kant, Newton, Locke, and others. Ours is a tradition extended through time and socially embedded in the U.S., Canada, England and parts of Ireland and Scotland. The encyclopedic tradition is not narrow; it is indeed *encyclopedic*. It has political, scientific, religious, and philosophical aspects. The intellectual tradition of modernity arises alongside the rise of the modern state. We do well to remember that almost all the luminaries of the Enlightenment philosophy also wrote on politics: Mill\'92s ethical writings are almost always written with an eye to reformer civil law; Kant wrote books like *Perpetual Peace*; John Locke wrote about perception and understanding but also treatises on government. Within modernity, we analytic philosophers have further source texts in Russell, Frege, and Wittgenstein, instigating arguments over how to best conduct philosophical enquiry, the definition of analytic philosophy, and the relationship between language and thought. These arguments take place almost exclusively in a university setting, through academic books, conferences, lectures, seminars, and journal publications rather than (as in other times) through newspapers, popular books, parliamentary debates, and so on. \
\
The difference between 'tradition' and neighbor concepts, such as culture, theory, institution, inquiry, and practice will, I hope, become clearer below. And a few objections to MacIntyre's allegedly vague definition will be discussed below. The reader is not yet expected to agree with such a characterization of tradition. It is sufficient, at this juncture, to grasp the point and to grant it as an axiom for what follows. \
\
### MacIntyre's intellectual history ###\
\
MacIntyre's lifework has been an invitation to recover the tradition of virtues. But virtues are not free-floating moral concepts; they are embedded in a living moral tradition, the Aristotelian tradition. Before I presented his account of virtue, I needed to supply at least a makeshift account of tradition. There is one other account I need to give. Even with a notion of ourselves as embodied members of a living tradition of Enlightenment modernity in hand, it would be an injustice to MacIntyre's way of presenting his theory as the fruit of his own philosophical enquiry if I did not briefly tell the story of that enquiry. \
\
MacIntyre's intellectual history is a story of several intellectual crises. Each crisis compelled him to draw on the resources of history and of contemporary philosophy and science to discover not just a more adequate answer to the particular intellectual problem but to reflect on methodology. \
\
He grew up in a "border" culture between rustic Scottish fishing villages and the elite intellectual life offered him at the independent Epsom College and by his tutor R. G. Collinwood. During his undergraduate study of the classics at Queen Mary College of the University of London, he acquired an interest in ethics. He pursued an M.A. At the University of Manchester and wrote his thesis ("*The Significance of Moral Judgments*") critiquing the emotivism of C. L. Stevenson. \
\
From his early work on Marxism and historical ethics, to his middle period writing on virtue, moral epistemology, and tradition, to his latest writings on the university, one persistent theme has been a radical critique of the foundations of Enlightenment modernity.[@mcmylor2005alasdair] Many who critique the rationalism and foundationalism of modernity end up with "the masters of suspicion" who distrust thought, language, and rationality itself. MacIntyre took a surprising course. The kinds of critical analysis the "masters of suspicion" use did level to the ground much of the edifice of modernity. But rather than embracing a thorough, cynical, postmodernism of this sort, MacIntyre took to an older and still vital foundation among the ruins. It is upon this foundation of Aristotelian virtue, and eventually Thomism, that MacIntyre continues to build. \
\
One of MacIntyre's most memorable and oft-cited images compares modern moral discourse to the hypothetical state of scientific discourse in a post-apocalyptic catastrophe. Only decaying fragments of intelligible moral discourse survive. He invitation is this: \
\
>Imagine that the natural sciences were to suffer the effects of a catastrophe. A series of environmental disasters are blamed by the general public on the scientists. Widespread riots occur, laboratories are burnt down, physicists are lynched, books and instruments are destroyed. Finally a Know-Nothing political movement takes power and successfully abolishes science teaching in schools and universities, imprisoning and executing the remaining scientists. Later still there is a reaction against this destructive movement and enlightened people seek to revive science, although they have largely forgotten what it was. But all that they possess are fragments: a knowledge of experiments detached from any knowledge of the theoretical context which gave them significance; parts of theories unrelated either to the other bits and pieces of theory which they possess or to experiment; instruments whose use has been forgotten; half-chapters from books, single pages from articles, not always fully legible because torn and charred. Nonetheless all these fragments are reembodied in a set of practices which go under the revived names of physics, chemistry and biology. Adults argue with each other about the respective merits of relativity theory, evolutionary theory and phlogiston theory, although they possess only a very partial knowledge of each. Children learn by heart the surviving portions of the periodic table and recite as incantations some of the theorems of Euclid. Nobody, or almost nobody, realizes that what they are doing is not natural science in any proper sense at all. For everything that they do and say conforms to certain canons of consistency and coherence and those contexts which would be needed to make sense of what they are doing have been lost, perhaps irretrievably.[@macintyre1984after 1]\
\
The picture here captures the state of moral discourse. The moral problems moderns face they can only address using the scraps of a previous and whole moral tradition. Since modern researchers (philosophers, historians, sociologists, etc.) all use methods and even practice disciplines that post-date the catastrophe, they cannot recognize the futility of their own research in recovering the coherence that has been lost. \
\
Now, MacIntyre's image is not merely about morality as one sub-field within academic philosophy. It is about morality as part of the fabric of social and political life, part of what binds groups together, gives urgency and meaning to their joint projects, sustains consensus about civil laws by which honors and goods are distributed and criminal punishments are delivered. We live, MacIntyre surmises, in an \'93emotive\'94 culture. We use each we do not assume nor strive for common moral standards. An obvious symptom of the decay of moral discourse and social unity is interminable ethical disagreement.[@macintyre1984after 6] Moral discourse is largely devoted to moral disagreement, and moral disagreement is largely soaked in despair of ever reaching agreement. It is \'93shrill\'94 disagreement because each side is attempting to win by rhetoric; and each side is attempting to win by rhetoric because each side believes that no dialectical or logical case can be made on behalf of their value theory. Oddly enough, however, neither side wants to give up the *appearance* of having a dialectical case for its value theory. Moral discourse with its interminable moral disagreement retains the rhetorical *trappings* of rationality and objectivity while denying rationality and objectivity.\
\
Culturally and politically, moral discourse is a mess. In academia, things are no better. Professional ethicists disagree with each other on any applied ethical issue you can think of such as the permissibility of abortion, the standards of justice in war, the limits of medical regulation and so on. They also disagree about the background issue in resolving practical moral problems -- that is, which normative framework to use, deontology, utilitarianism, divine command theory, contractarianism, quietism, ironic nihilism or something else entirely. Modern ethicists have sometimes taken comfort in the retreat to meta-ethics. Perhaps stepping back from sticky normative questions will permit the calm, cool, and rational resolution of some problems in moral semantics, moral metaphysics, and moral epistemology. Yet after a century of metaethics, the field has not consolidated but proliferated moral disagreements. Both parties are passionate, informed, intelligent, open-minded and yet cannot come to anything like agreement on the formal and material propositions under dispute. It seems that deep and abiding disagreement within normative ethics and metaethics is the defining datum of modern moral philosophy. This is the "catastrophe" MacIntyre pictures above.\
\
Rather than despair, MacIntyre observed an analogy between morality and science that proved extremely fruitful. He was deeply moved by Thomas Kuhn's influential work on the structure of revolution between various paradigms in the natural sciences. What if a similar structure obtained in revolution between paradigms or traditions in the "moral sciences"? Anyone familiar with Kuhn's watershed *Structure of Scientific Revolutions* has felt the significance of his provocative argument. Briefly, as I read it, Kuhn's work directly confronts the widespread and naive belief that consensus in natural scientific inquiry has been growing in slow and steady straight line since the 1600s. Rather, Kuhn persuasively argues, specific paradigms by which practitioners conduct research and through which they interpret evidence come and go. Some are fruitful, and are employed for generations. But some stagnate. A paradigm is a research program that unites many researchers with a methodology and unites their conclusions within a stable scientific system of doctrine. The encyclopedia of knowledge can be augmented or pruned, but its taxonomy stays mostly the same. A paradigm comes in for trouble when lingering worries about the fine points of a scientific system and research program beget doubts about that system as a whole. If not resolved, these worries bloom into a full-blown epistemological crisis. At certain periods of epistemological crisis, researchers from rival programs (once dismissed) burst into the limelight by solving a problem the previous paradigm did not have the conceptual resources to solve. A paradigm shifts, a revolution has occurred. The new paradigm becomes entrenched in the establishment. Once young, rebellious, and revolutionary, it becomes middle-aged, stable, and respectable. It is the scientific paradigm of a new era. From the perspective of one paradigm, it is difficult or impossible to judge the rational credentials of a rival paradigm. \
\
Now, Kuhn concluded his study in a radical pluralism about rationality and methodology. This smacks of a scientific relativism unpalatable to many scientific realists. Paul Feyerabend cheerfully embraced this possibility. He argued for "epistemological anarchism," where *any* method will do as long as it is "fruitful." He thought that "rationality" and "science" were merely bully terms with sociological power to club dissenters from the dominant paradigm into submission. MacIntyre took a different tack.\
\
MacIntyre began to speculate about the possibility that Kuhn and Feyerabend\'92s analyses of scientific progress and scientific crisis could be fruitfully applied to ethics. His 1977 essay on epistemological crises was his own version of Kuhn's *Structure of Scientific Revolutions* -- we might call this essay MacIntyre's "Structure of Ethical Revolutions".[@macintyre1977epistemological] The parallel between the two explains several features of MacIntyre\'92s ethical philosophy. MacIntyre\'92s ethical theory is both extremely cognizant of historical background and extremely cognizant of methodology; some have thought his ethics (of the good) collapses into epistemology (a means of rationally identifying the good). The thought is a mistake, but an understandable one. An understandable mistake that also happens in the philosophy of science. \
\
This comparison between *ethical* crises and *scientific* crises makes clear why the epistemology of morality features so prominently in MacIntyre's later works. He is not only trying to give an account of the good but trying to give an account of the rational faculties and rational resources by which communities and individuals discover the good. \
\
MacIntyre's ethical philosophy began in crisis and despair, but did not end there. It ended, rather, in a thoroughgoing Thomism that is at once historicist and progressive, at once optimistic and anti-relativistic. Making sense of such a conclusion is not easy. But it is much easier if we are clear about where his radical critic of the modern tradition arises from, and how he aims to solve it. \
\
## Virtue, Practice, Tradition\
\
I can now present MacIntyre's account of virtue.  His virtue theory is not fully supplemented until he completes the\'93*After Virtue* Project\'94 consisting of *After Virtue* (1984), *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* (1988); *Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry* (1990); and *Dependent Rational Animals* (1999). But the most focused presentation is *After Virtue*. We will begin there. \
\
In this section, I will reflect in detail on his initial definition, which he derives from a careful study of the traditions of virtue from Homer, Plato, Aristotle, the Greek tragic poets, the New Testament, Aquinas, Jane Austen, and Benjamin Franklin. Then I will summarize how he expands this definition with supporting concepts such as the self (which is the bearer of individual virtue), practice (which is an activity in which virtues are needed), practical reason (which is our human nature). \
\
Each of these interlocking concepts build on and also support his conception of virtue. If these concepts as presented are accurate to the phenomena of human life, then each one lends support to MacIntyre\'92s conviction that \'93humans need the virtues.\'94 \
\
### Virtue \'97 a first pass\
\
MacIntyre\'92s philosophical methodology is exemplified in how he defines \'91virtue\'92 within *After Virtue*. He begins with Homeric virtues (roughly, the performance of one\'92s social role) and concludes with his own His account is historical but not historicist; it aims for universality but is not purely abstract conceptual analysis. It is, in a word, traditional. MacIntyre\'92s definition emerges from history but is not restricted to its history; he does not vow to conserve. Yet it does not appear \'93out of heaven\'94, unprecedented, unpredicted, unaccountable, and ready-made. \
His first definition, as mentioned above, is that virtues are \'93acquired human qualities that enable their possessor to achieve those goods which are internal to practices."[@macintyre1984after 191] A few initial comments are in order about each phrase of this definition. \
\
First, virtues are acquired *human* qualities, presumably opposed to analogous qualities of lower animals.  Formal or functional qualities that enable an animal to survive and thrive (i.e., the flexible flagellum of the bacterium, the swiftness of a deer) are excluded from the class of virtues by definition. Now, MacIntyre later changes his mind on this point. *Dependent Rational Animals* will challenge *After Virtue*\'92s presumed opposition between human and non-human animals. \
\
Secondly, virtues are *acquired* human qualities. In the first line of Plato's *Meno*, Meno asks Socrates a question that moral philosophers have continued to try to answer for the last 2,400 years. He asks "whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice; or if neither by teaching nor practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"[@plato, *Meno* 70a] MacIntyre's answer is not that virtue is a gift of the gods, but that it is *acquired.* This is important because, as a recent volume edited by Mark Alfano[@alfano2015current] discusses, one important question for virtue ethicists is the range of what positive traits count as virtues. MacIntyre, it would seem, limits the range to exclude inborn or genetically determined qualities like a good memory or excellent eyesight from being considered virtues. In this, he agrees with Aristotle that virtue is *in accordance with* nature but not *by nature*. That is, we might say, virtues do not arise "automatically" but also are not acquired by working against the grain of our human nature. Rather, they can be seen as a "normal" psychological outgrowth of cultivating certain human practices. \
\
Thirdly, virtues enable their possessor to achieve particular *goods.* There are two implicit points here. Virtues by definition are beneficial. A virtuous trait *cannot* be directed at achieving ills. This point solves by definitional fiat a very vexing question that recurs often in ethical philosophy, namely, can overall vicious and wicked people have particular virtues? Can the thief be courageous, the dictator magnanimous, the glutton affable? It certainly seems that the answer is yes. I shall discuss this point a bit more under the objection of relativism. \
\
A second implicit point is that virtues here seem to be defined instrumentally.  A misunderstanding lurks in the vicinity. Virtues *are* instrumental for MacIntyre, but they are not *merely* instrumental. They are both instrumental (to the achievement of certain goods) and also *partly constitutive of those goods.* Virtues are both means to an end and also ends in themselves. Phronesis or practical wisdom, for example, enables agents to make good decisions that result in greater happiness and thriving as a human being. But also having phronesis *just is part of the definition* of being a thriving human being. Now, this refusal to treat the means/end distinction as clean and absolute is liable to cause his critics to misunderstand his position. As Charles Taylor points out:\
\
>It is a feature of many modern theories... that they cannot abide this kind of relation, in which one element is both cause and constituent of another. It is a central demand of one influential construal of modern reason that one clearly sort out means from ends. For utilitarians, the good is happiness, and virtues can only be good instrumentally... If the basic point of morality is to do the right actions, then the virtues must be seen as purely executive. They cannot also be seen as part of the end, because the end is not defined that way.[@taylor 25] \
\
This worry exposes deep fault lines. For the sake of completing my presentation of virtue, I must set it aside for now. I shall return to it under the heading of the objection about teleology.  \
\
Fourthly, MacIntyre defines virtues with reference goods internal to *practices*. Practice is a key term of art within MacIntyre's theory of virtue. To misunderstand 'practice' would be to misunderstand MacIntyre. So with these initial comments in hand, I shall more deeply explore MacIntyre's unfolding account of virtue in the following sub-sections. Each section will elaborate on one of the following key components: practice, self, and tradition. \
\
### Practice ###\
\
What is a practice? A practice is a social activity aimed at defined ends. Each practice has a history, a set of practitioners, a common set of standards, and a common goal. MacIntyre mentions chess, farming, and political activity as examples *inter alia*. A practice is not merely a reflexive action (like scratching an itch) nor merely a single, discrete, intelligible action (like pulling a weed); it is an intelligible set of actions such as tilling, sowing, watering, protecting, harvesting, storing, etc., all embedded within a social context and organized around a particular goal. Farming is a social activity undertaken (let's say) for the sake of producing sufficient quantities of edible food for the farmer, the farmer's family, and the general marketplace. (This example is not intended to be controversial \'97 please overlook any factual mistakes on the details.) Farming as a practice has a history or series of cultural histories, a set of farmers who belong to it or practice it, and a common set of standards that define good and bad farming.  \
\
Leading MacIntyre scholar, Christopher Lutz, analyzes MacIntyre\'92s famous passage into the following four statements. A practice is: \
\
>[1] a complex social activity that [2] enables participants to gain goods internal to the practice. [3] Participants achieve excellence in practices by gaining the internal goods. When participants achieve excellence, [3] the social understandings of excellence in the practice, of the goods of the practice, and of the possibility of achieving excellence in the practice are systematically extended.[@lutz2015] \
\
As this explication makes more clear, MacIntyre\'92s notion of virtue and practice is tied to the goods \'93internal to\'94 practices. He later calls internal goods "goods of excellence" and calls external ones "goods of effectiveness.\'94 The point here is, I think, clear. The goods internal to farming are just those that *necessarily constitute success within a given practice as it is*: the production of good food, edible food, nutritious food, etc. (Of course, not all farmers aim to produce comestibles, but I am generalizing.) Virtues relative to the practice of farming might include strength, dexterity with equipment, sensitivity to service animals, etc. Without these, the goods internal to farming are unachievable. \
\
Goods "external" to farming are those that might result from the practice but are not necessary parts: fame, fortune, good friends, physical fitness. Mere efficiency in attaining such external goods does not entail the presence of a virtue. In fact, the desire to pursue external goods in the course of engaging in a practice is not just a neutral desire \'97 it is a *temptation.* Virtues are needed to overcome those temptations and to succeed at political activity, judging \'93success\'94 only by the standards defined within practice itself. \
\
An illustrative example is political activity. Political activity can be undertaken by agents motivated to achieve goods internal or external to the practice. That is, some people engage in political activity *in order to bring about* the health, securing, and flourishing of the *polis*. But others (we need not speculate the proportion!) engage in order to achieve \'93external\'94, unessential, goods such as satisfying their own ambition, achieving fame and power. Very often we see American politicians running for office with apparently only one aim: book sales. \
\
As I see it, virtue defined by practice can already be significantly contrasted against mere *happiness* or *pleasure* as found in Mill, and against mere *duty* or *good will* as found in Kant. On the one hand, the standards by which farmers judge each other are not static and universal formal laws. They are \'93contentful,\'94 immanent, flexible standards. On the other hand, the standards by which practitioners judge each other are not all \'93external\'94 ; they are not merely an arbitrary set of social conventions. Farmers cannot get together and decide farming is no longer about husbandry but is about selling land along highways for billboard advertisements. The practice itself, with its history and its aims, has a structure that is persists across generations and flexes, but does not break, with varying standards. That structure is passed along, modified, but modified according to an inner logic. Many have agreed with Elizabeth Anscombe\'92s characterization of consequentialism more generally that it views all consequences as \'93external.\'94 She puts the point in this way: \
\
>Now the consequentialist has no footing on which to say "This would be permissible, this not"; because by his own hypothesis, it is the consequences that are to decide, and he has no business to pretend that he can lay it down what possible twists a man could give doing this or that; the most he can say is: a man must not bring about this or that; he has no right to say he will, in an actual case, bring about such-and-such unless he does so-and-so.[@anscombe1958 13] \
\
I shall return to this discussion of external goods below in the teleological objection. \
\
The internal goal of farming is (by my hypothesis) the production of edible food; its practitioners *as farmers* are committed to this goal without any eye toward broader features of farming as a business. A farmer may attend conferences about the future of his field, but he does not do so in his strict role as farmer, but in his role as citizen or businessman. By contrast, the practice of farming demands specific virtues. A farmer must be honest in order to maintain positive relationships with various suppliers and buyers; a farmer must be courageous, willing to withstand real pain and risk possible harm for the sake of the good being pursued, in order to face unseasonable weather, illness, or other misfortune. \
\
### Self ###\
\
MacIntyre's account of virtue begins in terms of practices. Virtues sustain and eventually improve practices while vices enervate and eventually ruin them. A second layer of his account in *After Virtue* defines virtues as beneficial *to* human beings, human selves.[@macintyre1984after chapter 15.] Humans perform practices; humans are the bearers of virtues and vices. What is a human self? The Enlightenment picture of selfhood, personality, or agency is a radical divergence from the prior tradition. Drawing the contrast between MacIntyre\'92s view and the modern puts into clear relief the differing conceptions of the good, of nature, and of *telos*. \
\
The Enlightenment concept is the empty self. The self is not social *by nature*; it is atomic by nature and only social by choice, or contract, or artifice. The empty self does not have a history; the body arises from a biological history but the self emerges as it were from nowhere, suddenly possessed of detached freedom. The empty self does not have a naturally-ordained destiny; it is self-determining, self-legislating, and ultimately self-creating.\
\
John Horton and Susan Mendus summarize the contrast well enough to quote them in full:\
\
>Where Aristotle understood man as a creature with a definite function which he might fulfill or deny, modern morality sees man simply as a rational agent who has no true or definable purpose independent of his own will... By appealing to a telos, Aristotle was able to distinguish between the way we actually are and the way we should be. His conception of human beings as having a specific *telos* brought with it the possibility that we might fall short of the ideal... But with the rejection of Aristotelianism gain the rejection of any such distinction between what we are and what we should be. Post-Enlightenment man is seen as governed, not by a *telos* external to him, but simply by the dictates of his own inner reason... Thus the abandonment of an Aristotelian conception of the good has not only left us without standards by which to evaluate our moral arguments, it is also cast us adrift in the moral world. For Aristotle, a conception of the good for man has an essentially societal dimension.[@horton2015 6] \
\
The Enlightenment thinkers (such as Kant) and their heirs (such as John Rawls) reject inherent teleology and inherent sociality. Indeed, they celebrate the empty self. The elimination of these strictures seem an increase in freedom. But the Enlightenment picture of the empty self is, MacIntyre thinks, disastrously wrong. The strictures do not result in increased freedom but increase in anxiety and despair. \
\
It is difficult to understate the importance of this point about the self and its relation to not only virtue theory but ethical theory itself. Edward Oakes describes the removal of *telos* from our worldview as \'93perhaps the greatest category mistake ever made in the history of philosophy.\'94\
\
>That word \'93teleological\'94 is the key to MacIntyre\'92s solution, the loss of which is the cause of the catastrophe described in his science-fiction parable. Teleology is the study of final causes, goals, purposes, and aims: a style of explanation that saturates Aristotle\'92s philosophy. After the combined impact of Newton and Darwin, however, this type of explanation seems mostly 'quaint' and once Aristotle\'92s science seemed quaint, his ethics soon followed: when Newton demonstrated how motion can be better explained as resulting from the outcome of mechanical laws, and when Darwin posited natural selection as the \'93mechanism\'94 for explaining an organ\'92s functionality, the use of teleology in ethics was doomed.\
>This is perhaps the greatest category mistake ever made in the history of philosophy. Emptying moral discourse of teleological concepts because of the perceived impact of Newton and Darwin has been for MacIntyre the catastrophe of our times.[@oakes1996] \
\
It will come as no surprise that MacIntyre\'92s view of the self, the narrative of life, the end of humanity, ethics, and rationality itself come to be built on the notion of telos, restored to its proper place. In the modernist picture, I am a moral subject. I am a self among other selves. My present self is a time slice of my overall total self (through time), I am able to know facts and value values, I have my own good separate and apart from your good and that of my family and community and society. In the traditional picture, I am a moral subject. I am a self among other selves. In the present, I owe my being and personhood to the past (especially my family who biologically gave me being) and psychologically and culturally to my tradition. I am able to know truth, for there is only one manifold of truths. My good is that of my community; my community\'92s good is that of mine. These data are fundamental. \
\
On this issue, MacIntyre argues the standard communitarian line.[Cf. @taylor1985atomism] The detachable empty self, divorced from past and from community is not the real self.  While this section is not the place to adjudicate this dispute, a few comments are worth making to clarify MacIntyre\'92s location on the conceptual map.\
\
Two considerations are often cited as evidence of the communitarian view of the self. First is the sociological and anthropological point that each of us belongs by nature to a family (via genetics) and a culture (via upbringing). There is no Tarzan or Mowgli raised outside a culture. Rather, it is in social institutions (clubs, churches, schools, guilds, towns) that practices are learned, taught, preserved, extended. In social conditions we develop what virtues we may possess and what vices we may suffer from. We are trained in cowardice and vice by "corrupt traditions.\'94[@macintyre1984after 223] \
\
Second is the observation that *we do bear* responsibility for the actions of our ancestors. One example likely to be persuasive to modern liberal thinkers is that of transatlantic slavery. A present day black American's identity is in part defined by the relationship of 18th century blacks to 18th century whites. Similarly, present day Irishman's identity is in part defined by the relationship of 18th century Englishman to the 18th century Irish slaves. If the notion of the detachable self were true, then my personal identity would have nothing to do with the trials and triumphs of those in the past; I could justly deny any part in pre-existing structures. \
\
By contrast, it seems that each of us takes an identity, at least in part, from our past and from our tradition. \
\
### *Telos* and happiness ### \
\
For MacIntyre, the loss of *telos* (human-nature-as-it-should-be) is one of the chief if not the chief error of Enlightenment moralities. Human-nature-as-it-is is a topic for both philosophers and social scientists: psychologists, sociologists, anthropologists, etc. But *telos* unifies human nature as it is with ethical principles and realistic ideals by which we can become something other than what we are at present. \'93To travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive\'94 and yet a having in mind a clear *telos* is a precondition for traveling hopefully. \
\
In the seminal text of the \'93Aristotelian tradition\'94, the *Nicomachean Ethics*, MacIntyre finds the view that humans \'93like the members of all other species, have a specific nature; and that nature is such that they have certain aims and goals, such that they move by nature towards a specific *telos*. The good is defined in terms of their specific characteristics\'94.[@macintyre1984after 148] For Aristotle the virtues are \'93precisely those qualities the possession of which will enable an individual to achieve eudaemonia and the lack of which will frustrate his movement toward that *telos*.\'94[@macintyre1984after 148]\
\
We can see that Aristotle\'92s account includes these ingredients, all of which interlock with the others to form a coherent picture of a human being or community being excellent at life. (A) Human nature is part of nature; and for Aristotle \'93nature\'94 extends to include formal, final, material, and efficient causes. Also, our end and (to some degree) the qualities that enable us to achieve that end are natural to us. (B) The virtues are those qualities that enable persons and communities to achieve their end, which is eudaemonia. (D) The *telos* of humanity is its (natural) final cause, its end. Eudaemonia is not pleasure, not wealth, not just wisdom, but virtuous activity.\
\
MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue is \'93neo-Aristotelian\'94 in that it borrows from but also contrast with Aristotle\'92s. (MacIntyre, for instance, denies that Aristotle\'92s virtues are so timeless, abstract, and generically human as Aristotle would make them appear; they are partly indexed to fourth century, upper-class, educated Athenian culture.) \
\
His provisional conception of our human *telos* is this:  \'93The good life for man is the life spent in seeking for the good life for man, and the virtues necessary for the seeking are those which will enable us to understand what more and what else the good life for man is."[@macintyre1984after 210] Our *telos* is to be free to pursue our *telos*. MacIntyre is not a eudaemonist. At least, he is not obviously a straightforward eudaemonist; this conception of the human *telos* is more vague than Aristotle\'92s or Aquinas\'92s. Perhaps it is only provisional because it is so extremely indeterminate. How could it be made more determinate? The virtues needed to preserve the quest for the good, he suggests, may illumine \'93what else\'94 our *telos* consists in.  \
\
This essentially historicist view of human life is key to MacIntyre\'92s virtue theory. To see why, we need to think about narrative. In the minds of many contemporaries, human life is broken into isolate stages (childhood, adolescence, old age, etc.). The human self is isolated from its present community and from its position in relation to the past. By contrast, MacIntyre\'92s synoptic vision of human life is narrative.[See especially @macintyre1984after chapter 15] Human life is a unity, from birth to death (for individuals) and from emergence to dissolution (for groups and traditions). A human social group is a unity of members, more like an organism than  just an aggregate of atoms.  Narrative is not \'93disguise or decoration\'94 but an essential feature of the working of our minds and (arguably) an essential feature of the unfolding of reality through time. Narrative is not only a way of telling ourselves intelligible stories about what has happened, but is the very stuff of life. \
\
The end of our narrative (the terminus) is, of course, individual death. But narratives also have an end (goal). He says, \'93We live out our lives, both individually and in our relationships with each other, in the light of certain conception of a possible shared future, a future in which certain possibilities beckon us forward and others repel us, some seem already foreclosed and others perhaps inevitable."[@macintyre1984after 215] The unity of that narrative lies not only in our identity as a central character of our story, and our place in larger narrative contexts, but in the single *telos* governing all the moments of our \'93quest.\'94 Of course, quests do not always achieve their object. The narrative of human life always reaches its end (in death) but doesn\'92t always reach its end (in success, achievement of telos). But to see our whole life synoptically requires seeing it as a narrative.\
\
With this in mind, the relation between virtue and *telos* comes more clearly to light. Since not only individual agents but whole communities and institutions (and the whole human race!) are aimed at a telos, the presence of virtues sustains practices and traditions. The absence of the relevant virtues \'93weakens and destroys\'94 practices and whole traditions.[@macintyre1984after 223] The absence of the higher level virtues, weakens and destroys the generically human goods: minimally, the freedom to pursue our *telos*. \
\
MacIntyre says: \
\
>The virtues therefore are to be understood as those dispositions which will not only sustain practices and enable us to achieve the goods internal to practices, but which will also sustain us in the relevant kind of quest for the good, by enabling us to overcome the charms, dangers, temptations and distractions which we encounter, and which will furnish us with increasing self-knowledge and increasing knowledge of the good.[@macintyre1984after 219] \
\
The \'93quest for the good\'94 is necessary but not sufficient. It is good, and it cannot be completed without relevant virtues. And yet there is more to the good. So that first provisional conception of *telos* as indeterminate may be right. For if a person or community could secure the freedom to pursue their telos, they could secures an ethical and political space within which to develop higher-order virtues. \
\
These higher-order virtues are the context for and hence limit and guide the other lower-order virtues. Still further, social and political virtues are also the context, limit, and guide to individual virtues. Social and political virtues are \'93required to sustain the kind of households and the kind of political communities in which men and women can seek for the good together and the virtues necessary for philosophical enquiry about the character of the good\'94[@macintyre1984after 219]\
\
Hence, MacIntyre is not a eudaimonist. At least, he is not obviously a straightforward eudaimonist. He seems to be saying that our *telos* is to be free to pursue our *telos*. But this is not quite correct. He concludes that the human *telos* (whatever it might robustly turn out to be) includes minimally the freedom to explore "what else" the *telos* might be. It is not vacuous to conclude that the virtues needed to achieve this (extremely indeterminate) goal themselves indirectly make room for and might directly illumine \'93what else\'94 our *telos* consists in. It may turn out (and his later writings are more explicit about it) that the determinate *telos* of a given tradition is a more determinate conception of eudaemonia. \
\
I defer a full discussion of teleology until the next section. If we return to the concept of practice with the *teleological* and *social* properties firmly in mind, then MacIntyre's account becomes more clear. Farming is not a solitary and abstract activity but is always undertaken by farmers who apprenticed (under parents or mentors). Farmers who master the practice become not only beneficiaries but benefactors, and may innovate new or better ways of farming that can be passed on to the next apprentice or child. \
\
Thus far, we have seen that MacIntyre presents virtues as those qualities acquired by individual selves in the performance of practices that serve the intrinsic teloi or ends of those practices. \
\
\
### An initial worry \
\
One worry that many readers have shared is that MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue, thus far, is all too easily seen as a type of relativism: Is torture a \'93practice\'94? Is grand theft auto a practice that one can be excellent at? It certainly seems reasonable to think that some acquired qualities allow one to achieve the goods internal to car stealing. MacIntyre vehemently denies being a relativist and devotes the whole of *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* to capturing the truth in relativity while escaping relativism.[@macintyre1984after xii-xiii in the 25th anniversary edition] \
\
He admits that there *might* be evil practices. (We can add that institutions or traditions can be evil.) If so, then some \'93virtues\'94 that enable the achievement of goods and the health and continuance of institutions would be bad qualities. To avoid relativism, he must say something to do justice to the assumption that virtues are not neutral with respect to ends, but are actually *good* for their possessor. He must put practice into a broader teleological context and question whether life *as a whole* can be virtuous. He does say that the virtue of \'93integrity or constancy\'85 of singleness of purpose in a whole life.\'94[@macintyre1984after 203] (Integrity is not our telos, but it is a necessary condition.) Even putting human life into a unified, narrative context does not ultimately solve the problem of relativism. For we still might worry: is there a single *telos* for human life? Is there a unity to all the virtues such that \'93wicked virtues\'94 can be excluded? And if so, is it rooted in our \'93metaphysical biology\'94 as Aristotle thought? \
\
A fuller discussion of relativism I return to below, clarifying the charge and rebutting it. For now, the charge of relativism effectively motivates MacIntyre\'92s third layer in the *After Virtue* account. His answer to this worry is, I believe, the crux of his whole theory of ethics. It appeals to two concepts that are, for him, intimately bound up with each other. The two concepts are practical reason and human nature. (In the next section, I shall show how practical rationality and tradition meld into one concept.) I shall discuss each in turn and attempt to show how they are unified in MacIntyre\'92s thought. \
\
### We are practical reasoners ###\
\
I would like to add details from *Dependent Rational Animals* before turning to *Whose Justice?* The project of *Dependent Rational Animals* is to insist that (a) human beings are animals even if we are animals of a particular and unusual sort; and that (b) our dependence and vulnerability are as morally significant as our independence, autonomy, or self-sufficiency. In other words, there are virtues of both autonomy *and* dependence. The book also contends that (c) certain social arrangements are conducive to the transmission and sustenance of both kinds of virtue.  \
\
Let\'92s consider a key quotation on each of these themes. Regarding (a) the notion that we are unusual animals, MacIntyre argues at length that the human differentia (be it language, reason, practical reason, self-consciousness, or what have you) does not eradicate the commonalities between us and other animals. He says: \
\
>\'93I shall contend that although our differences from all other species are certainly of crucial importance, it is also important that both initially in our earliest childhood activities and to some extent thereafter we comport ourselves towards the world in much the same way as other intelligent animals. Indeed our ability to transcend those limitations depends in part upon certain of those animal characteristics among them the nature of our identity.\'94[@macintyre1999dependent 8] \
\
The point, I take it, is that we are practical reasoners. Imagine any scenario of humans gathering and doing what comes naturally, and it will involve group deliberation about what to do: A group of high school students exiting class for lunch stop in the hallway and argue about where to sit; a senate sub-committee convenes to deliberate on whether to pull federal funding from a particular health organization; a U.N. Assembly convenes to deliberate whether to place sanctions on a recalcitrant nation; a philosophy professor chats with the department chair about how to boost the number of majors; a father and mother sip wine, after the kids are in bed, while arguing over the grocery budget. The pattern each instantiates is a group of human beings engaging in practical reason \'97 a community thinking what to do. It is difficult to get out of bed in the morning without engaging in practical reasoning with others. Abduct the principle from the particulars: human beings, us, are practical reasoners in community. We are practical reasoners in communities. \
\
This is the first point. The second is that our lives are not lived out as adults, but progress from young, to middle aged, to old. Regarding point (b), he argues that vulnerability, dependence, affliction characteristic especially of early childhood and old age, but also of any sickness, injury, or misfortune are highly morally significant.  As he says:  \
\
>\'93Virtues of independent rational agency need for their adequate exercise to be accompanied by what I shall call the virtues of acknowledge dependence and that a failure to understand this is apt to secure some features of rational agency. Moreover both sets of virtues are needed in order to actualize the distinctive potentialities that are specific to the human rational animal. Identifying how and why they are needed is a prerequisite for understanding their central place in the kind of human life through which human flourishing can be achieved.\'94[@macintyre1999dependent 8] \
\
Finally, regarding (c), MacIntyre argues that \'93neither the modern state nor the modern family can supply that kind of political and social association that is needed.\'94[@macintyre1999dependent 9] \
\
How do the arguments of *After Virtue* connect to these points? We may fairly draw this connection: since human beings are animals, social animals, and social practically-reasoning animals, our account of ends and the virtues that enable them must be sensitive to all three of these points. \
\
Whatever definition of virtue we settle on will generate a \'93list\'94 of virtues. Whatever virtues are included on the list had better not exclude virtues that make human life possible; it had better not exclude (as Aristotle did) women and manual workers from the very possibility of developing virtues. \
\
We can see how the structural limits on what it means to be human begin to set boundaries on our ethical theories. Empirical study cannot tell us what is good, but it can set limits on *what is not* going to be good for creatures like us. Biologically, we are animals evolved from simpler animals.[@macintyre1999dependent x] But our practical reasoning sets us apart in some respects. We have the burden and responsibility to set the course for our own lives, and to care for the dependent among us who are not yet practical reasoners or who are no longer such. \
\
The practice of practical reasoning is a universal human practice. This makes sense of why educational institutions (as one example) are so important. Without them, virtues \'97 and the goods open to the virtuous \'97 are liable to remain unavailable to many. Vices harm the dependent and restrict them from becoming independent practical reasoners. \
\
MacIntyre is first and foremost a philosopher of *practical reason*. Weinstein says that the primary theme of his work has not been goodness or virtue but practical rationality itself.[@weinstein2003macintyre %%page number%%] In this he defends the assumption that morality is not a special domain of practical life but simply is the domain of *living well*.  *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* and *Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry* take up themes about rationality per se, while *After Virtue* and *Dependent Rational Animals* follow the Aristotelian pattern of treating ethical issues as species of practical rationality. \
\
Our human nature as dependent practical reasoners also clarifies why prudence or *phronesis* is the master virtue. It complements and completes every other moral virtue. MacIntyre defends Aristotle\'92s conception of the practical syllogism wherein the major premise is an evaluative judgment about a virtue or action-type; the minor premise is a truth judgment about a situation or action-token; the conclusion is *an action*. For example, \'93I ought to do (the courageous thing of) resisting a student\'92s attempt to bribe me for a higher grade. This student is attempting to bribe me for a higher grade. Therefore, in this case, I ought to do (the courageous thing of) resisting this student\'92s attempt to bribe me.\'94 Without moral virtues, prudence is simply the knowledge of *what is to be done*. Without prudence, the moral virtues are simply skills or habits that might be serviceable to bad ends; one might be excellent in achieving *what is not be done*. \
\
The mastery of prudence over other virtues also unifies the other virtues. *Dependent Rational Animals* advances MacIntyre\'92s virtue theory in that it supplies a basis for the unity of intellectual and moral virtues, for the unity of the various moral virtues, and for unity of the various stages of the narrative of *human* life. The paradoxical notion of \'93wicked virtues\'94 are explained only with this broad context of human life, and with this definition of human nature. As Christopher Lutz says, \'93The strength of MacIntyre's account of practices is that the pursuit of excellence in a practice entails the pursuit of virtue, but if practices can be evil, and virtues can "enable us to achieve those goods which are internal to\'94 such an evil practice, and virtues can be anything at all.[@lutz2004tradition 101]\
\
Although these responses to the initial worry about relativism may bring up more questions than they answer, they at least present a coherent picture of human life and the qualities needed to live it well. \
\
### Section Conclusion\
\
While there is much more that could be said, let's call this adequate and consider some of the responses to MacIntyre's work. \
\
MacIntyre thinks that "human beings need the virtues" because they are intrinsically good and useful for transforming communities and persons.[@macintyre1999dependent] At the practical level of daily life, a small community (such as a family or town or university) does well to organize themselves around a common vision of what is good and a common conception of what qualities will help everyone to attain that good. At the theoretical level of philosophical ethics, the concepts of virtue, practical wisdom, and happiness supply for moral theory what many modern moralities have not: a clear, coherent, useful, and justifiable theory that grounds a rational pursuit of the good life and resolvable moral disagreements. \
\
For MacIntyre, moral enquiry is a practice that takes place within a tradition, a community. It can and should be undertaken by regular folk, not just specialists in philosophy. And the goal of such enquiry is discovering what is really admirable and pursuing it, becoming more admirable moral agents through the acquisition of virtues. Virtues are acquired traits that enable the achievement of goods internal to the practices, those traits that sustain traditions, and those traits by which we overcome perennial temptations to lead lives that are divided, deviant, or contrary to our true nature. \
\
\
## Objections \
\
MacIntyre\'92s work has been influential. Yet he has opponents on all sides. It will be impossible, of course, to do mention let alone do justice to all the responses offered by MacIntyre's sizable crowd of readers, interlocutors, and critics.  Instead, I shall pick out just a few that seem to me the most helpful.\
\
In the following sub-sections, I group his three types of critics. Then, I articulate and discuss key objections especially from his \'93encyclopedist\'94 critics. \
\
The primary objection regarding virtue as he defines it relative to practices, the narrative of human life, and tradition, is the charge of relativism. This is a weighty objection and deserves almost a whole chapter in its own right. \
\
A related objection regarding tradition-constituted rationality charges MacIntyre with an incoherent definition of tradition; if some traditions are truly incommensurable to each other, and MacIntyre himself is truly situated within a tradition, then writing a book like *After Virtue* which is written from a universal, objective, view-from-nowhere should be impossible. Writing *After Virtue* and defending a theory of virtue amounts to a performative contradiction. \
\
The third objection regarding teleology and the \'93quest\'94 for human happiness or fulfillment is twofold: on the one hand, it seems that modern moral philosophy can get along quite well without teleology. On the other hand, even if it couldn\'92t, then that seems to indict philosophical ethics entirely as unscientific, hopeless, superstition. \
\
I summarize the secondary literature on these points, as well as MacIntyre\'92s replies, and attempt to adjudicate the conflict. Finally, I shall close with a reflection on why his philosophical ethics is so liable to misunderstanding and, to some, so infuriating. The same features of his theory that infuriate some magnetically fascinate others and so reflection on them may, I believe, illuminate MacIntyre\'92s distinctive legacy. \
\
\
### Relativism objections\
\
Jonathan Swift was rightly comforted by being called 'a giant' in Lilliput but 'a midget' in Brobdingnag; the compresence of opposite insults is a good indicator that he was a perfectly sensible size. Likewise, MacIntyre should be comforted that he is pejoratively called a rationalist by the fideist and a fideist by the rationalists; he is called a progressive by traditionalists and a traditionalist by progressives; he is called far too liberal by conservatives and far too conservative by liberals. \
\
The most recurring objection to MacIntyre\'92s ethical philosophy is a cluster of worries about relativism. Ironically, and perhaps comfortingly, he is accused of being too relativistic and of being not being enough of a relativist. \
\
Briefly put, the worry is this: MacIntyre's virtue, it seems, is relative to practices, to communities, to institutions, or to \'93rival versions of moral enquiry\'94 \'97 in a word, virtue is relative to traditions. It is entirely possible for traditions to be incommensurable with each other. Hence, it is possible for conceptions of virtue to be incommensurable with each other. \
\
Acceptance of a tradition entails acceptance of *a* particular definition of virtue and list of virtues; denial of a tradition (or denial of *tradition itself*) entails the rejection of any definition of virtue and list of virtues. In light of this interpretation of his ethical theory, all MacIntyre has done is given a kind of anthropological account of what people from that group consider to be virtues, not what virtues *actually are*. The inquirer interested in, say, which tradition is *correct* or which version of moral enquiry is *correct* is at a loss. We might call this \'93tradition relativism\'94.\
\
How do we make sense of this objection? First we have to stipulate what "relativism" is. Fully defining the constellation of (sometimes conflicting) positions that fly under that heading is no small task. Instead of attempting to adjudicate them, I shall follow Stephn Lutz: \'93Relativism\'94 is a conclusion of an enquiry to the effect that there are no truths free from contingent, historical conditions of the would-be knower.[@lutz2004tradition 66] To the relativist, the knower's individual or cultural perspective is both starting point and ending point of any enquiry. \
\
Stephen Lutz summarizes nine objections that might fall under the heading of the \'93relativism objection.\'94[@lutz2004tradition 74ff.] Three of these are misunderstandings, three are justifiable questions that MacIntyre's theory, fully developed, can answer, and three are legitimate observations of the limits of MacIntyre's theory. Whether the identification amounts to a "critique" depends on whether those limits are *the actual limits* on enquiry. \
\
I shall briefly summarize Lutz' discussion of the first six criticisms before addressing more fully the last three. \
\
#### Feldmen ####\
\
That of Susan Feldman[@feldman1986objectivity] misinterprets MacIntyre\'92s project as a failed and incoherent attempt to resolve factious, subjective ethical disputes by judging them from an abstract, objective, ideal observer. But MacIntyre never explicitly presents his theory as an ideal observer theory; rather, he explicitly denies it. The ideal observer would have to *begin* the enquiry from the view from nowhere, which is impossible for us. MacIntyre just is not building -- not even *attempting* to build -- a procedural meta-ethics with which to adjudicate otherwise intractable normative disagreements. \
\
\
#### Wachbroit ####\
\
A second criticism is from Robet Wachbroit.  MacIntyre himself responded to Wachbroit in the second edition of *After Virtue*.[@wachbroit1984relativism] Wachbroit's worry is about the fundamental plurality of rationalities. He thinks MacIntyre faces a dilemma. Either MacIntyre himself writes from the view from nowhere, the Enlightenment objectivity, the archimedean point, or he writes from within the Aristotelian tradition. MacIntyre seems to get caught in this dilemma in sentences like these: "It scarcely needs repeating that it is the central thesis of *After Virtue* that the Aristotelian moral tradition is the best example we possess of a tradition whose adherents are entitled to a high measure of confidence in its epistemological and moral resources."[@macintyre1984after 277] To whom does that 'we' refer? The dilemma, again, is that either 'we' are the Enlightened modern liberals or 'we' are the dyed-in-the-wool Aristotelians. On the first horn, if he writes from the view-from-nowhere, then MacIntyre is simply a modern meta-ethicist writing modern meta-ethics. He is criticizing liberalism from within the liberal tradition; he is borrowing the resources of the liberal definition of rationality to posit a theory in which no one definition of rationality has the resources to write books like *After Virtue*. On the second horn, if 'we' are card-carrying Aristotelians, it is trivial and almost tautologous to assert that 'we' take a high measure of confidence in Aristotelianism's epistemological and moral resources. Of course 'we' do! That kind of heady confidence that 'we' are up to standards arises within *each* tradition according to *that* tradition's own standards. \
\
Wachbroit misunderstands MacIntyre's theory ever so slightly here. MacIntyre can run through the horns of the dilemma. The 'we' need not be an ideal observer from a God's-eye point of view nor an Aristotelian already subsumed in the Aristotelian tradition. The 'we' can be those of us within broader western culture who have faced or might face the same kind of epistemological crisis that lead MacIntyre (and others) to critically evaluate the present state of western culture. The adherent of liberalism and the adherent of Aristotelianism share a common social, historical, and traditional root. Without too much difficulty, they can learn each other's conceptual vocabulary as a 'second language'. By self-reflecting upon the Enlightenment "branch" of the broader western tradition, and by facing up to its inadequacies and epistemological inconsistencies, the liberal adherent can test for him or herself whether the Aristotelian tradition has more resources for solving problems that are problems *by liberalism's own lights*. If, as MacIntyre did, such a person discovers that the Aristotelian has more resources for solving those problems, he or she might make rejoin with that older but no less thriving tradition. \
\
#### Colby Objection ####\
\
Mark Colby misunderstands MacIntyre's project as an attempt to develop a new, objective criterion of truth that will solve the problem of epistemological crisis, regardless of one's tradition. On Colby's reading, MacIntyre is a kind of pragmatist, where the truth is just the conclusion of a certain sort of rational enquiry. But MacIntyre denies this. The test of a traditon's rationality is its adequation to reality. Lutz illustrates this with the example of astronomy. \
\
> Ptolemaic astronomy lasted 1000 years because it solves a set of astronomical problems better than any of its opponents, including the heliocentric models of Aristarchus and Copernicus. Nevertheless, it did not adequately characterize the true nature of planetary motion and so under close evaluation it was plagued by inefficiencies that lead its adherents into a epistemological crisis. The theory that overcame Ptolemaic astronomy did so because it solved the astronomical problems or adequately than the Ptolemaic model, and it was confirmed by its predictive capacity. The fact that Kepler's astronomical model once subsumed into Newtonian physics, could predict novel facts provided confirmation that it was not only a clever description of a puzzling phenomenon, but a more adequate characterization of its object: the true nature of planetary motion.\
> what counts as progressiveness in the epistemological crisis resolution is improved adequacy to truths, but it pissed him logical crises only rise *within* traditions. Ptolemaic astronomers overcame *their* epistemological crisis when they abandoned *their own* geocentric beliefs Intertraditional considerations arise only when the adherents of one tradition are able to recongize in the resources of another tradition a more adequate solution to their own epistemological crisis. So progressiveness in epistemological crisis resolution cannot function as an intertraditional norm of rationality. This is no challenge to MacIntyre, however, because MacIntyre does not envision epistemological crisis as a tool for comparative ethics or meta-ethics.[@lutz2004tradition 91]\
\
As I understand Lutz' point here, Colby is conflating the attempt of an inquirer *within* a tradition to resolve his or her epistemological crisis through examining the resources of a rival tradition with the attempt of an inquirier *outside* both traditions to resolve "epistemological crisis" per se by developing an intertraditional or trans-traditional criterion of adequacy. MacIntyre thinks the former is possible (and happens often) but that the latter is impossible. \
\
#### Roque Objection ####\
\
Alicia Juarrero Roque surfaces another possible misinterpretation. MacIntyre claims that "comparison" between traditions is possible for an inquirer. But it is not possible by the attainment of an objective, context-free stance. Rather, each inquirier acquires a conceptual framework from his own tradition -- this is like a "first language." But each inquirer has the capacity to learn a "second first language". We can learn another conceptual framework philosophical imagination, through taking it *as if true* even before affirming it *as true*. Why do this? Usually because the inquirer's own tradition has failed him; he sees its inadequacies, he sees its problems and contradictions, he sees that it fails to live up to its own standards. MacIntyre describes what "rare gift of empathy" that this "philosophical imagination"[ makes possible: \'93\'85understand the theses, arguments, and concepts of their rival in such a way that they are able to view themselves from such an alien standpoint and to re-characterize their own beliefs in an appropriate manner from the alien perspective."[@macintyre1988whose 167]\
\
Roque's worry is that the capacity for learning a second first language is an innate, rational capacity that *all people share.* If so, then belief in such a capacity contradicts the definition of tradition-constituted rationality. If not, then the absence of such a capacity renders tradition comparison impossible. MacIntyre's response is flatly to deny this interpretation of his work. The "capacity" to learn another tradition as a "second first language" is a "rare gift of empathy" and in no way part of a supposed bundle of innate capacities. This rebuttal does not make such a capacity unproblematic; we still might wonder whether, for an given inquirer, that inquirer's estimation that he possesses the gift of empathy and philosophical imagination isn't just a re-statement of the trivial thought, "I think I am right."\
\
\
#### Evil practices ####\
\
As we observed earlier, virtues exist only in the context of practices. Yet some practices seem to be evil. MacIntyre's earlier theory cannot overcome this objection, Lutz argues. He says:\
\
>Unfortunately, the relativism of *After Virtue* cannot be overcome unless its definitions of the virtues are extended to embrace the Aristotelian and Thomistic doctrine of the unity of virtue. Macs rejection of the unity of virtue in *After Virtue* has grave implications for the rest of his virtue theory because the rejection of the unity of virtue divroces the intellectual moral virtue of prudence from the passional moral virtues of courage, temperence, and justice... Prudence becomes cleverness. Courage and temperance are relativized, so that one could reasonable speak of the virtue of courage in a Nazi... Likewise, justice is reduced to some notion of fairness.[@lutz2004tradition 98]\
\
There have been ethical philosophers who endorse this kind of reductive virtue. Lutz mentions Edmund Pincoff as an "emotivist virtue theorist" (using "emotivist" in the narrower, MacIntyrean sense). Lutz continues by examining the implications of such a theory. Such a move has two main effects: (1) "It constitues the rejection of the Aristotelian practical syllogism that MacIntyre wanted to recover in *After Virtue* because it separates prudent reasoning from virtuous action. (2) It evacuates all falsifiable substantive moral content from the virtues, reducing them to enabling qualities."[@lutz2004tradition 100] The commonsense definition of "virtue" includes positive valence. A virtue is, within our tradition, a quality *admirable for its own sake* or else a quality that enables its bearer to *achieve admirable goals*. If a procedure results in a definition of virtue wherein even bad qualities or even good qualities that enable any given wicked goal, then the procedure has gone awry. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
### Incoherence of the concept 'Tradition' and rationality Objection\
\
The set of relativism objections and replies to them push us to articulate more clearly MacIntyre\'92s theory of rationality. Ethical reasoning is practical reasoning; and practical reason is a mode of *reasoning* per se, a mode of practical rationality in action. Living well depends on thinking well, though of course thinking well is merely necessary and not sufficient for living well. \
\
For this reason, the last objection Stephen Lutz discusses under the heading of \'93relativism\'94 I shall discuss under the heading of \'93tradition-constituted rationality.\'94 The objection is twofold: first, is MacIntyre\'92s concept of tradition-constituted rationality even coherent? Second, is it clear enough to be an indispensable feature of an ethical theory? \
\
 MacIntyre says on the one hand that, according to Tradition A, X is rational. According to Tradition B, X is not rational. They disagree and seem to genuinely disagree. A member of Tradition A can reasonably affirm that X cannot be both rational and irrational. Now, MacIntyre says that a member of Tradition B can discover some internal contradiction in Tradition B that makes her reconsider her tradition as aw hole. Perhaps she discovers that, according to Tradition B, Z is both rational and irrational. She is disconcerted by the contradiction. She decides to imaginatively entertain the possibility that Tradition A is more adequate and comes to see, over time, that Tradition A\'92s critique of Tradition B is compelling. The odd conclusion is this: affirming a contradiction is irrational for anyone in any Tradition. Now, I endorse this conclusion; if someone affirms a contradiction, and they persist in it in spite of repeated attempts to explain to them the contradiction, I would find them not just mistaken but fundamentally mentally impaired \'97  irrational. But the point is not whether the law of non-contradiction is true and a reliable criterion of rationality. The point is that MacIntyre cannot say so without contradicting himself. \
\
Suppose first that Tradition A teaches that logical contradictions are irrational, while Tradition B teaches that logical contradictions can be rational. Then the member of Tradition B that affirms a contradiction (Z is both rational and irrational) will not, by her own standards, see a problem with her affirmation. A member of Tradition A will see the problem (by his own standards), but this is nothing surprising or new. The member of Tradition B has in principle no path out of her tradition, no motivation to see her tradition as mistaken, and hence no motivation to consider Tradition A. \
\
Suppose now that Tradition A teaches that logical contradictions are irrational and Tradition B teaches the same. Now, according to MacIntyre, they agree (at least on this point) about a standard of rationality. They disagree about whether Z is rational or not, but they agree that Z cannot be both irrational and rational at the same time in the same respect. Are Tradition A and B now part of the same tradition, since they agree about the law of non-contradiction? Or are they different traditions, since they disagree about the rationality of Z? \
\
\
\
### *Telos* ###\
\
A third major objection pertains to MacIntyre\'92s view of teleology. His whole ethical case against rival modern traditions of modernity and postmodernity is predicated on their rejection of teleology; his case for Aristotelian tradition of virtue is predicated on the recovery of *telos*. \
\
This objection takes two forms. On the one hand, it seems that morality (not to mention politics and society) can get along well without teleology. To make good on what is possible, one must simply furnish an example of what is actual. To make good on the usefulness and adequacy of a non-teleological ethics, one simply needs to furnish such an ethics. Two broad schools of thought take themselves to supply such an ethics: Kantian deontologists and consequentialists. \
\
For example, on the other hand, it might be objected that *some* modern ethics *are* teleological after all. For instance, it seems that consequentialism is teleological in a more plausible sense of *telos*. For consequences are *ends* of actions. I go to work *in order to* earn a paycheck at the end of the month; the consequence (my paycheck) is the goal or purpose or point of the action (going to work). So perhaps virtue ethics can be synthesized with consequentialism. \
\
On the other hand, it seems that the moral law *by itself* tells us what actions are wrong or not wrong. @korsgaard1996authority argues that the autonomous moral law delivers judgments -- and generates categorical obligations -- without regard to teleology. These duties or laws are generated by our *practical identity*. That is, there are some actions that violate my practical identities. Trivially, if I call myself a baker I must bake things. If I refuse to bake I disintegrate that practical identity. Though she does not say it like this, I would state that identities are *functional concepts.* To be a farmer is in some sense to *do what farmers do*. To be a sea captain, or a teacher, or a father, is to *perform the functions* prescribed by or definitionally built into those concepts. Even if the exact limits and boundaries of a functional concept are sometimes fuzzy or flexible, they are still intelligible. Now, my first and fundamental practical identity is that of human being.[@korsgaard1996authority] I simply must value my own humanity if I am to value anything at all. And I do value things; therefore, I do value my own humanity. Anyone who values anything values their own humanity. So the moral law delivers content-full moral duties derived from my own autonomously legislated rules prescribed by my valuing humanity; these rules are not teleological in that they require any future fulfillment of an end to validate them. \
\
\
## Discussion\
\
I take it these three constellations of objections are the most telling against MacIntyre's own theory. In this section I shall attempt a rebuttal of each one. I shall close with a discussion of MacIntyre's influence and why, I think, his theories are so polarizing.\
\
### Relativism response\
\
\
Jonathan Swift was rightly comforted by being called 'a giant' in Lilliput but 'a midget' in Brobdingnag; the compresence of opposite insults is a good indicator that he was a perfectly sensible size. Likewise, MacIntyre should be comforted that he is pejoratively called a rationalist by the fideist and a fideist by the rationalists; he is called a progressive by traditionalists and a traditionalist by progressives; he is called far too liberal by conservatives and far too conservative by liberals. \
\
Now, MacIntyre denies relativism. Instead, he accepts the thesis that all of our inquiries, including our understanding of rationality itself, takes place within a cultural, historical, and traditional context. Following Lutz, we can say that MacIntyre accepts \'93relativity\'94.\
\
Relativity (a term borrowed from Michael Krausz[@krausz1984relativism]) is a thesis about *the condition of enquiry.* It is not a thesis about the *conclusion of enquiry.* Lutz approves of Mark Colby's statement that "argumentative situatedness is inescapable."[@lutz2004tradition 89] \
\
Such relativity, such situatedness, is compatible with objective or absolute or mind-independent or tradition-independent *truth*. It is incompatible with an objective or absoltue or tradition-independent *rationality*. From the historically- and socially-situated position of enquiry, a philosopher (he argues) may indeed find truth. In my terms, our contingent social, cultural, and individual perspective is an alpha point of every enquiry but is not the omega point of every enquiry. \
\
In *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?*, MacIntyre explicitly retracts his earlier belief that virtues exist without a unity under prudence.[@macintyre1988whose preface, p. x] The consequences of this retraction, Lutz argues, are wide-ranging and crucial to refuting the charge of relativism. If virtues are unified, then even though virtues exist only in the context of practices, "no genuine practice can be inherently evil."[@lutz2004tradition 102] Rather, practical reason can judge *apparent goods* as genuine goods. The qualities needed for achieving the spurious goods internal to that "practice" would not be virtues but only *apparent virtues*. Now, such a definition certainly seems ad hoc. But Lutz provides a persuasive illustration: eugenics. Eugenics certainly seems to bear the markings of a genuine practice. Its apparent good is the purification of the gene pool for future generations. However, genuine virtues militate *against* the achievement of that goal. For example, Lutz cites a story of a Nazi doctor who had the virtue of compassion found himself unable to pursue the program of euthanizing mentally-disabled children. Even the doctor seemed disappointed with himself, asserting that he "approve[d]" state measures with conviction" but was "too gentle for this work... Heil Hitler!"[@@poliakov1979harvest 186-7] We might also recall Huck Finn's internal struggle with his "conscience" in *Adventures of Huckleberry Finn*.[@twain2014adventures Chapter 31] \
\
Huck decides to turn Jim in to the slave owners. He writes a letter outing Jim, and feels much better after "repenting" of his theft: \
\
>I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I had ever felt so in my life, and I knowed I could pray now. But I didn\'92t do it straight off, but laid the paper down and set there thinking\'97thinking how good it was all this happened so, and how near I come to being lost and going to hell...  \
\
After vividly confronting Jim's humanity, his goodness, and their loyal friendship, he wavers. \
\
>It was a difficult situation. I picked up the letter, and held it in my hand. I was trembling, because I knew had to make a choice between two things, and the outcome of my decision would last forever. I thought about it a minute while I held my breath. And then I said to myself: \'93All right, then, I\'92ll GO to hell"\'97and tore it up. It was awful thoughts and awful words, but they was said. And I let them stay said; and never thought no more about reforming. I shoved the whole thing out of my head, and said I would take up wickedness again, which was in my line, being brung up to it, and the other warn\'92t. And for a starter I would go to work and steal Jim out of slavery again; and if I could think up anything worse, I would do that, too; because as long as I was in, and in for good, I might as well go the whole hog.\
\
The humor of this passage arises, in large part, because of the tension between the *apparent good* of treating Jim as legal property and the *actual good* of treating Jim as an end in himself, as a free man just like any other. Huck's virtue (in this case, loyalty or friendship) *cannot* be put to use in the service of a corrupting practice like slave-trading. Just as vice subverts institutions and their worthy practices, virtue "subverts" vicious institutions and unworthy practices. Virtue marks the difference between the coward who disobeys his commanding officer's orders because the obedience would put him at risk of painful death and the courageous person who disobeys his commanding officer's order because obedience would require wrongdoing. Without prudence to discriminate between the two cases, we lack any resources by which to discriminate courage and cowardice, between a virtuous resistance and vicious resistance. \
\
MacIntyre's account satisfies two desideratum, which together form a paradoxical explanandum: his account explains why vices sometimes persist within pseudo-practices, institutions, and traditions from generation to generation, and it explains why practice-enabling virtues sometimes emerge to disrupt a pseudo-practice, a wicked institution, and a corrupt or at least incomplete tradition. The fact is that "many kinds of activities can be, and in fact are considered to be, practices. Some of these may conflict radically, owing to errors and insufficiences in rationlity."[@lutz2004tradition 103] Errors in rationality explain errors in traditions and hence misacriptions of the title 'virtue.' Rationality answers to truth, to the world as it is, not merely to the pragmatic reduction of truth to "dialectical success."[@lutz2004tradition 104] Hence, virtues answer to *what is really good*. They do not merely answer to "what-counts-as-good-for-us", which property is relative to each tradition. \
\
In this way, MacIntyre escapes this iteration of the charge of relativism, while still explaining why rival traditions differ -- and sometimes radically differ -- in their evaluations and opinions. Incomplete traditions can, and do, undergo crisis. Particular persons within that tradition discover and perseverate on inadequacies within the tradition, leading to an epistemological crisis. In response, others within the same tradition may become willing to examine the resources of rival traditions and either quit their primary tradition or re-fashion it, re-make it, update it, and make real moral and intellectual progress. \
\
### J. L. A. Garcia ###\
\
J. L. A. Garcia says that \'93MacIntyre\'92s rebuttal is as radical as it is ingenious. It is, in effect, to outrelativize the relativist. Rather than recoiling from relativism, as I understand his strategy, MacIntyre plunges so deeply into it, as we might say, to fall out the other side\'85 Contrary to what he sees as the relativist\'92s hasty and facile assumption, MacIntyre insists that it is not necessarily (nor always) the case that everyone is so situated that there is no position whose adoption *by her* at *any* time would be rationally superiors to some particular *set* of alternatives\'85Now the tables are turned, and it is the relativist who appears the dogmatist, claiming to know in advance and *a priori* that no one can be so situated.\'94 This all appears to me correct. MacIntyre uses the genealogist\'92s starting points to undercut the encyclopedist \'97 a move which implicitly approves of moral relativism. But he doesn\'92t stop there; he uses all the resources of intellectual history and contemporary natural and social sciences to defend some (but not all) of the beliefs and values of modernity, such as the value of democracy, the value of university education, the value of history, the belief in the possibility of scientific truth, the belief in progress \'97 a move which seems to endorse the Enlightenment and the liberal tradition as against the genealogists. To both, his challenge is to use the best resources of the past and the best rational resources of the present to defend a particular set of conclusions *as the best thus far*, as the *closest* to the truth. To both, his challenge is to defend a conception of morality and rationality *neither* claiming that any such conceptions are impossible *nor* claiming to have *concluded* the enquiry once and for all.\
\
### Relativism Objection Conclusion ###\
\
MacIntyre has responded to (and he thinks refuted) the charge of relativism multiple times, in his primary works and in \'93responses to critics.\'94 Yet for many, relativism stains the image of MacIntyre. Even after clarifying the obscure points of the dialectic MacIntyre does endorse, the objection can be resolved but not finally refuted. I would like to offer a suggestion as to why this is so. Rather, the resolution of the criticism can only come through self-reflection by the critics on themselves; hence MacIntyre\'92s dialectic, properly understood, invites even critics to self-reflection. This is a kind of *resolution* of the criticism. For, to accept this invitation is, in some sense, to join MacIntyre in the enquiry, which is to either lay down the criticism or persist in making it from a new vantage point within the enquiry. By contrast, to deny the invitation is not *strictly speaking an objection* but a sociological or psychological move, a decision not to become part of that enquiry. This not the \'93victory\'94 of the objection over MacIntyre\'92s theory, but a refusal to allow MacIntyre\'92s theory to define the terms of the enquiry. \
\
\
\
\
### Incoherence of the concept 'Tradition' and rationality Objection\
\
I think it true that tradition influences our standards of rationality, justice, and virtue, but demonstrably false that it *constitutes* such standards. The law of non-contradiction is the counterexample. \
\
Every tradition affirms the law of non-contradiction; every tradition denies rational agents the right to believe (P & ~P). Any tradition that denies the law of non-contradiction, it seems to me, is an irrational tradition. And I don\'92t just intend to say it is irrational relative to my own standards of rationality, but that it is irrational full stop and possible to \'93step outside\'94 my tradition far enough to see that. If there even does exist any person (such as Nagarjuna) or community or tradition that affirms (P & ~P), we ought not interpret them as having a different standard of rationality but rather we ought to interpret them as believing that rationality is an obstacle to nirvana. Affirming contradictions is still irrational, but it is the kind of irrationality needed to do violence to the limits of rationality and transcend them. \
\
So I think MacIntyre\'92s unqualified claims about tradition constituting rationality should be limited to claims about other standards for acceptable kinds of evidence, etc.\
\
\
#### Clarity \'97 the Definition of tradition ####\
\
A different angle to the same objection is the very definition of the term \'91tradition.\'92 Some readers, such as John Haldane, question MacIntyre\'92s ability coherently to identify what a tradition is. Call this the Differentiation Problem. Are two traditions separate and hence identifiable only if they are incommensurable? How much difference constitutes separation? How much overlap is compatible with difference? Jewish and Christian traditions share a common origin and bear considerable overlap in authorities, scriptures, and doctrines. \
\
MacIntyre\'92s definition makes such teasing out difficult. He characterizes a tradition as \'93separate and unified when its members or texts have a core set of shared commitments to beliefs, when the tradition is situated in a particular context in a particular set of institutions and when the tradition has an identifiable linguistic difference when compared to other traditions.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 83] \
\
The response that Weinstein gives is this. We should not expect, by MacIntyre\'92s lights, that there is an automatically objective, view-from-nowhere by which we can define tradition itself. Rather, MacIntyre concludes that \'93the concept of a tradition, together with the criteria for its use and application, is itself one developed from within one particular tradition-based standpoint. This does not preclude its application to the very tradition within which it was developed.\'94[@horton1994after 295] This is liable to frustrate some readers. But the alternative (by MacIntyre\'92s lights) is intellectual imperialism wherein one tradition has the *real* scoop on every other tradition. MacIntyre grants that his self-definition of his own tradition arises, in part, from his criteria of that tradition. Traditions change over time. They progress (according to their own unchanging standards) toward unchanging goals or else they abandon old standards. \
\
I think MacIntyre\'92s solution stands or falls with his theory of rationality and practical rationality, which is, of course, tradition-constituted. This may not satisfy critiques but it cordons off their objections. It pushes back, to demand that the critics self-reflect and specify their own tradition (in MacIntyre\'92s words) even as they demand a definition of the term \'91tradition\'92 (in their own words). \
\
\
///\
\
#### Justification of Morality Objection #### \
\
I would like to expand this objection by appeal to a slightly different one. I am indebted to @dandrea2006tradition for his illuminating explication and discussion of this objection. He points out that Philippa Foot (inter alia) levels against MacIntyre: after all the informative and wide-ranging historical analysis, MacIntyre\'92s account does not solve the \'93problem posed by Plato, and never solved \'85 that of showing the rationality, for any man, of a thorough-going acceptance of the restraints of justice.\'94[@foot1981] This is the \'93problem of immoralism\'94 she tries to address in the final chapter of her *Natural Goodness*. \
\
The challenge of a Nietzsche or Callicles or Thrasymachus lies in their acceptance that the good life for humans *requires* some virtues or requires virtue in some sense but their rejection of the \'93robust concept of justice with its corresponding constraints on action.\'94[@dandrea2006tradition 430]\
\
One response is this: the question \'93why be moral?\'94 is never asked in the abstract. Philosophers often pose the \'93why be moral?\'94 question hypothetically, as if they were skeptics of one or another sort. But such an idealized moral skeptic will not do. And a non-hypothetical, non-idealized skeptic faces a problem, on MacIntyre\'92s theory. \
\
That problem is that if they are full-fledged members of their tradition, the \'93why be moral?\'94 question usually does not arise. There are two exceptions: The first when persons who succeed in sincerely asking the \'93why be moral?\'94 question who are, by definition, outcasts from their own society. The emergence of the doubt as to whether one should be moral, and the crystallization of the doubt into an articulate challenge, is *a political failure*. The *polis* to which the moral skeptic belongs has failed him. The moral skeptic, likewise, has failed the *polis* which belongs to him. Parents, teachers, religious leaders, politicians, businesses, and non-profit organizations all have a hand in giving each member of the community the tradition out of which the community arises and within which abstract philosophical or pseudo-philosophical worries such as \'93What does it all mean?\'94 simply do not arise. \
\
In drawing the distinction between the modern "emotivist self" and the "self of the heroic age" MacIntyre says, \'93In heroic society there is no 'outside except that of the stranger. A man who tried to withdraw himself from his given position in heroic society would be engaged in the enterprise of trying to make himself disappear.\'94[@macintyre1984after 126] In one sense, MacIntyre *dissolves* this worry. His strategy is not to give the skeptical \'93why be moral?\'94 question the devil\'92s due and solve it on its own conditions; his strategy is to undermine the conditions of asking it. \
\
The second exception is when moral skeptics *are* members of their own tradition but are seeing the problems within their own tradition and are troubled by a \'93border tradition\'94. This skeptic sees the resources of a rival tradition and compares such favorably with the resources of his own tradition. He is, in a word, entering epistemological crisis. And to such a skeptic, MacIntyre\'92s theory invites him or her to do the hard work of resolving that crisis by examining, from within the context of a primary tradition *and* a \'93second first\'94 tradition, the problems at hand and the available solutions, working toward an ever greater understanding of the truth. \
\
For this reason, again, I think MacIntyre\'92s solution stands or falls with his theory of rationality and practical rationality, which is, of course, tradition-constituted. \
\
### *Telos* reply \
\
On the other hand, however, these modern moralities are either covertly teleological or they are incoherent. \
\
First, as MacIntyre has forcefully (and I think persuasively) argued, virtue without *telos* becomes unintelligible. A society that highly values some virtue (say, chastity) but does so only out of habit --  without any wisp of certain knowledge about the effect chastity has on a man or woman's whole life --  will not long retain that high opinion. Chastity as a white-knuckle fiat not to engage in sexual intercourse with anyone other than one's opposite-sex spouse is simply too difficult, psychologically and morally, to seem valuable to someone who has no clue why chastity is so good for us, and why sexual license is so disastrous for humans, families, and societies. \
\
### *telos* and virtue (and life, and self) are an organic whole ##\
\
// If MacIntyre's suggestion that we need to recover the Aristotelian tradition of the virtues is to be taken as a serious plan, then we must recover *telos*. That is, we must discover or re-discover the organic holism of the narrative unity of my life, my identity and self-concept, the *telos* of human life as a species and my own specific *telos* as a member of that species, and the virtues that are the qualities that enable me to achieve my *telos*. Not one of these parts can be left out of the whole. \
\
The second option is that teleology is smuggled in. Charles Taylor argues this point persuasively.[@taylor] We do not need to take the point on authority. We can rediscover it ourselves rather quickly. \
\
As a sample for review, examine Kantian deontology and its base-line foundation: Kant famously pronounced: "Nothing can possibly be conceived in the world, or even out of it, which can be called good, without qualification, except a good will."[@kantgroundwork] This is the first principle of Kantianism: the categorical imperative, the value of humanity, the value of autonomy, the identification of a will that obeys the categorical imperative with 'the good will'.  The good will is good because it follows the good law; the law of autonomy (all other laws being heteronomous); the categorical imperative is the unconditional obligation on all practically rational beings whatsoever to treat other rational beings as ends in themselves, others being equally autonomous, others being equally human and therefore equally valuable. This is all very consistent. \
\
But why are humans valuable? Kant can give no answer to this. It is his own emotive assertion. \
\
Take any other modern moral philosophy such as Humean sentimentalism, utilitarian consequentialism, psychological egoism or contractarianism. Consider its base-line foundation, its summum bonum, its first principle, its Great Platitude, and you will discover the same baseless base, the same groundless assumption. \
\
For Humean sentimentalism the first principle is the relation between the good and my affections. "To have the sense of virtue, is nothing but to feel a satisfaction of particular kind from the contemplation of a character."[@humetreatise 471]\
\
For contractarianism it is the value of keeping promises. "The moral theory of contractarianism claims that moral norms derive their normative force from the idea of contract or mutual agreement." But such a value is a western prejudice.\
\
>Contracts require independent agents who are able to make and carry out promises without the aid of others. Historically, while white men have been treated as these pure wills of contract theory, Blacks and women have been treated as anti-will: dependent and irrational. Both ideals are false; whole people, she says, are dependent on other whole people. But by defining some as contractors and others as incapable of contract, whole classes of people can be excluded from the realm of justice. This point has been explored by other critics of contractarianism, first by Allen Buchanan (1993) and more recently by Eva Kittay (1999), who points out that not only are dependents such as children and disabled people left out of consideration by contractarian theories, but their caretakers' needs and interests will tend to be underestimated in the contract, as well.[@sepcontractarianism]\
\
For consequentialism it is the value of happiness or pleasure. All that Mill can say to the inquirer who wants to hear about *why* happiness is desirable is that people desire it.\
\
>It has already been remarked, that questions of ultimate ends do not admit of proof, in the ordinary acceptation of the term. To be incapable of proof by reasoning is common to all first principles; to the first premises of our knowledge, as well as to those of our conduct. But the former, being matters of fact, may be the subject of a direct appeal to the faculties which judge of fact- namely, our senses, and our internal consciousness. Can an appeal be made to the same faculties on questions of practical ends? Or by what other faculty is cognizance taken of them?\
>Questions about ends are, in other words, questions what things are desirable. The utilitarian doctrine is, that happiness is desirable, and the only thing desirable, as an end; all other things being only desirable as means to that end. What ought to be required of this doctrine- what conditions is it requisite that the doctrine should fulfill -- to make good its claim to be believed?\
>The only proof capable of being given that an object is visible, is that people actually see it. The only proof that a sound is audible, is that people hear it: and so of the other sources of our experience. In like manner, I apprehend, the sole evidence it is possible to produce that anything is desirable, is that people do actually desire it. If the end which the utilitarian doctrine proposes to itself were not, in theory and in practice, acknowledged to be an end, nothing could ever convince any person that it was so. No reason can be given why the general happiness is desirable, except that each person, so far as he believes it to be attainable, desires his own happiness.[@mill chapter 4, "Of what sort of Proof the Principle of Utility is Susceptible"]\
\
This kind of hand-waving does not inspire the confidence of eudaimonist virtue theorists who think that the "proof" of the principle of eudaimonia is "susceptible" of something much more robust. \
\
Reply to Objection 1. Korsgaard's point here is not far off from MacIntyre's (nor, I assume, far from Sandel's or any other communitarian's). Her thesis is that a moral identity qua practical identity is fundamental and supports other practical identities (like son, brother, citizen, teacher). Insofar as human nature is a real thing, MacIntyre can agree that humanity is a functional concept. If I am to be human, there are some deeds I must do. MacIntyre (and, I presume, other communitarians) would simply query whether I can discover my identity qua human before discovering it qua American or member of the Buhler family or "westerner". What is deepest metaphysically is last epistemologically. MacIntyre might argue that Korsgaard cannot discover her identity qua human without her western education, without reading Kant, without the benefit of being a part of the Enlightenment tradition. Korsgaard takes for granted her identity as a westerner and falsely construes that particular identity -- invisible to her -- as *the* universal human identity. Would Christine Korsgaard, the particular human being, have the same belief about human identity if she were raised not in the U. S. but in the E. U. or the U. A. E. in a different moral tradition? \
\
Reply to Objection 2. Consequences may be "external" or "internal." That is, consequences of an action may be non-natural or natural. The oxygenation of the blood is a natural consequence of breathing. Our biological make-up determines that the act of breathing and the oxygenation of the blood an organic whole. A natural consequence of holding your breath is a build up of carbon dioxide. Winning a world record for holding your breath underwater is a non-natural consequence of holding your breath. Consequentialists either do not distinguish between the two or are explicit that there are no ends or consequences related internally or naturally with some means. Take as a few examples this statement from G.E. Moore: \
\
>But before proceeding to this discussion I propose, first, to deal with the third kind of ethical question\'97the question: What ought we to do?  The answering of this question constitutes the third great division of ethical enquiry; and its nature was briefly explained in Chap. I (\'a7\'a7 15\'9717). It introduces into Ethics, as was there pointed out, an entirely new question\'97the question what things are related as causes to that which is good in itself; and this question can only be answered by an entirely new method\'97the method of empirical investigation; by means of which causes are discovered in the other sciences. *To ask what kind of actions we ought to perform, or what kind of conduct is right, is to ask what kind of effects such action and conduct will produce.* Not a single question in practical Ethics can be answered except by a causal generalization. All such questions do, indeed, also involve an ethical judgment proper\'97the judgment that certain effects are better, in themselves, than others. But they do assert that these better things are effects\'97are causally connected with the actions in question. Every judgment in practical Ethics may be reduced to the form: This is a cause of that good thing.[@moore Chapter 5, Section 89]\
\
Moore is explicit here that there are no acts that have intrinsic value (qua duty or qua virtuous deed); acts only have value insofar as they cause good effects. Good effects Moore argues are aesthetic enjoyments, knowledge, and friendships. Strangely enough, the same Moore defines the necessary relation between parts and a whole as an "organic whole" or "organic unity." But he sees no organic unity between (some) means and their ends. Some means are partially constitutive of their ends. We might say that the *means* and the *end* form in that instance an organic whole. Exercise *causes* (efficient causes) health; but it is partly constitutive of health. In other words, exercise *causes* (formal causes) health.  The relation between a formal cause and a final cause is an internal, natural, and necessary relation. The relation between the species gorilla gorilla as instantiated in an infant gorilla and a fully grown, mature one is an internal and natural and (given the proper circumstances) a necessary. relation. To deny that there are formal causes, or to deny that there are final causes, is simply to beg the question against teleological ethics. \
\
The problem here is inconsistency and self-deception. The modern tradition, the \'93traditionless-tradition\'94 either helps itself to Aristotelian *telos* while vehemently denying it, or (if honest) collapses into the \'93truthless-tradition\'94 of postmodernity. \
\
#### Ends/means Objection. ####\
\
I said above that the refusal to treat the means/end distinction as clean and absolute is liable to cause his critics to misunderstand his position. Charles Taylor endorses the notion that \'93the place accorded the virtues [is] a kind of litmus test for discriminating Aristotelian from modern ethical theory.\'94[@taylor 25]\
\
What could this mean? Behind the means/end distinction is a peculiarly modern assumption that formal and final causes are either not related or not *necessarily* related. There are various ways of cashing out this distinction. In biology, it is the distinction between form and function.[@huneman2006naturalising] In engineering it is the distinction between design and operation.\
\
\
\
### Even if there were no natural teloi, human action is teleological\
\
MacIntyre has a powerful response to this objection. It is, I think, satisfying. And that is that the conversation about the broader metaphysical implications of teleology can be side-stepped. We know that *human society is teleological.* All the activities *we* do, as humans, and activities *we do* in groups (the Republican or Democratic Party, the YMCA, the U.S.A., the Parent Teacher Association, Starbucks) is end-directed actions and practices. That is enough. Call it "social teleology." \
\
Christine Korsgaard has defended the notion of practical reason as the faculty we discover in ourselves *after* we are already acting in the world and reflecting upon our actions.[@korsgaard1996authority] It is not really up for debate that we are reflective creatures; everyone reading this is capable of reflecting on their actions, asking for and providing *reasons* for action that may or may not justify the action. This is close, I think, to MacIntyre's way of thinking. \
\
Our social practices *just are* intelligibly teleological. They cannot be understood without teleology. And that is enough to get MacIntyre's ethical case off the ground. *telos* can be recovered by reflecting on my actions, practices, and my whole life. With *telos* firmly in place as in indispensable part of my worldview, regardless of whether *telos* exists in nature more broadly, I can go on to recover the virtues.\
\
### Human action is teleological\
\
One thesis I would like to extract, develop, and defend is this: human practices are necessarily end-directed (teleological). \'93Social teleology\'94 has at least two and possibly three aspects: individual, collective, and human. The first aspect of social teleology is the end-directed behavior of each agent; the second is the end-directed behavior of social groups, like families, nations, clubs, congregations, and so on. The third, and most objectionable, aspect, is the end-directed activity of our species as a whole. What, if anything, does every human being intentionally pursue? \
\
The answer to this question is bound to be controversial. But before we try to answer it we can pause and point out that MacIntyre has made the question intelligible and urgent. \
\
Human life is, in some sense, a practice. It can be brought under the concept of a grand unified whole practice or pluralist set of practices. Human life is, at least viewed under this concept, therefore teleological and indispensably so. Iris Murdoch argued as much in her famous essay (1950) \'93The Sovereignty of Good over other Concepts.\'94  Even if human life has \'93no external point or \uc0\u964 \u949 \u955 \u959 \u962 \'94, it has one from within. We pursue projects. It is impossible, in other words, to bring our own human life under the concept of an event. \
\
This insight has important implications for ethics, as well as other fields: action theory, sociology, anthropology, philosophy of mind, and so on. I shall not explore those implications here. Michael Thompson has explored the implications for \'93practical philosophy\'94 (some metaphysics, philosophy of mind, philosophy of action, and more) in his *Life and Action: Elemental Structures of Practice and Practical Thought.*[@thompson2008life] This assumption-trouncing work is radical not in its conclusions but in its simplicity and depth of insight. Thompson argues that the concepts of practice, action, and life are successively larger conceptual spheres, where the latter includes the former, but where the former is constitutive of the latter. And upon reflection, each concept exhibits an undeniable Aristotelian structure. Modern theoretical and practical philosophies that obscure these concepts or miss the mark obstruct progress in practical philosophy. \
\
While I cannot do justice to Thompson\'92s admirable work here, I mention it to point out that MacIntyre\'92s thesis about \'93social teleology\'94 \'97 the irreducibly teleological or end-directed nature of individual and group human activities \'97 seems correct. And if it is correct, it demands the re-evaluation of some cherished assumptions. \
\
In sum, the rebuttal of the \'93no need for teleology\'94 objection is twofold: first, if the sort of teleology needed is merely social or anthropological, then that sort of teleology is defensible. Secondly, the alternative \'97 a purely formal ethics allegedly sanitized from notions of final causation, intrinsic ends, natural purposes \'97 is not actually an alternative to teleological ethics because it turns out to be covertly teleological in the end. \
\
If these rebuttals are in the right vein, then one of MacIntyre\'92s key points from *After Virtue*, *Whose Justice?*, and *Dependent Rational Animals* emerges as a shining light. That is, human life is teleological, and so the attempt to construct anti-teleological systems is impossible and the endeavor to conduct ourselves according to anti-teleological ethics is futile. \
\
Such a conclusion may be taken as quite dire. Or it may be invigorate optimism. Ethics, reinvigorated with teleology, might just be able to escape some of its modern quandaries. And not only ethics. Law, political philosophy, and applied disciplines like politics itself, rhetoric and debate, social philosophy, and others disciplines are given new promise and new hope. \
\
\
## Conclusion\
\
### Theorist of Rationality ###\
\
MacIntyre is a theorist of rationality (and of practical rationality and hence virtue). Hence rationally to assess his theory requires thinking through our own theory of rationality. But thinking about rationality is thinking through our own thinking. The errors we make in thinking are likely to be underscored by our attempts to *think them through*. The Greek proverb is: \'93If water chokes us, what shall we drink?\'94 If something is deeply wrong with the way we think, how can theorizing about rationality right the wrong? The Latin proverb (from a very different context) is \'93Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?\'94 \'97 who will guard the guards themselves? I believe the answer to the rhetorical question is no one at all can guard the guards. If water chokes us, there is nothing we can do to wash it down and clear our throat. Similarly, some of the errors MacIntyre diagnoses in thinkers who belong to the modern liberal Enlightenment tradition will be invisible to those thinkers. \
\
Even if MacIntyre\'92s diagnosis is *correct*, especially if it is correct, the patient will find the diagnosis unintelligible, even irrational. Insofar as the patient finds any parts of his theory intelligible, they will seem radical, disastrous in their social implications, and destructive of the very nature and purpose of education. The reason these appearances will be insuperable to MacIntyre\'92s patient is because the patient is, by his lights, self-deceived. He or she simply denies being part of a tradition, and hence denies having a particular (rather than universal) tradition-bound conception of rationality, and hence denies having a particular, tradition-bound conception of the good (perhaps the good is unbounded freedom to follow the moral law, or to pursue happiness,, and justice unfettered equality). Modernity is the \'93tradition-less tradition\'94 and hence *must* deny tradition to be consistent with itself. \
\
But *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* and others are directed toward the discontented liberal modern. This patient comes to MacIntyre with manifesting symptoms. MacIntyre offers one possible diagnosis, and the patient\'92s job is to investigate further. The patient needs philosophical imagination to even *consider* the possibility of another truth. The patient needs patience, intellectual courage, and self-reflection. The patient needs to sit in front of the proverbial mirror and mouth the words, (a) \'93I am part of a tradition\'94 and (b) \'93my tradition might be inadequate,\'94 and (c) \'93that other tradition might have the resources more adequately to address the intellectual and practical problems that I now see are insuperable to my tradition.\'94 \
It should come as no surprise to us, if we have come to terms with the debate, that both sides think the other side not merely *wrong* but *irrational*. Two opponents within a tradition can think the other side mistaken but fundamentally rational. Two opponents from opposing traditions more often think the other side \'93crazy\'94 or \'93nuts\'94 or \'93mad\'94, \'93bonkers\'94, or some other synonym for less-than-rational. \
\
Nevertheless, some (like Nagel) are surprised and perhaps even offended when the religious philosopher (like MacIntyre) concludes upon decades of reflection that his secular colleague is less than rational. No! Nagel protests, the religious philosophers is less than rational \'97 my secularism is by definition an allegiance to rationality over dogma. But Lutz rightly disentangles this web of definitional fiat and counter-fiat. If Nagel\'92s secularism is a dogma, and one unsustainable after decades of the most open-minded reflection upon best evidence, then the secular philosopher is not just mistaken but irrational. If this result seems surprising to the reader, it is a likely sign that MacIntyre\'92s theory has not yet been grasped. \
\
Nagel\'92s inability or unwillingness to consider that his secularism is a dogma or ideology would put disadvantage him relative to MacIntyre. For Nagel\'92s part, he *does* self-reflectively consider it, but does not express the further willingness to imaginatively and philosophically entertain the opposing tradition\'92s account. \
\
Enormous metaphilosophical disputes are in the offing. One side just isn\'92t doing philosophy anymore. My only point here is that which side it is is far from clear. Or, put differently, it is all too clear to modern, liberal, secular philosophers that MacIntyerean-type \'93philosophy\'94 just isn\'92t.  It is all to clear to modern, Aristotelian, religious philosophers that Nagalean \'93philosophy\'94 just isn\'92t. \
\
### MacIntyre\'92s Greatness\
\
Great thinkers \'97 Plato, Aquinas, Kant \'97 have a distinguishing feature of presenting a totalizing theory that not only explains a whole host of phenomena and solves problems, but explain why critics criticize. Great thinkers present not only philosophical solutions to philosophical problems, but a definition or understanding of philosophy itself. They are always philosophers *and* metaphilosophers. \
\
One of the features so satisfying to adherents of Plato, Aquinas, Kant (I could have mentioned a dozen others) is that their totalizing theory puts agreement in context and puts disagreement with the theory in context. It casts critics in a particular light. This is satisfying to adherents but infuriating to critics. \
\
One of the signs, I believe, of MacIntyre\'92s greatness is just this feature. He presents not only isolated theories but a theoretical system in which critics, depending on their criticism, receive a name, a number, a category, a classification, and a designated response. Adherents, too, are accommodated. But to criticize MacIntyre is much trickier business than one might suspect at first. Critics find themselves dipping into one of many already well-poisoned wells, and falling into pre-laid traps. The critic who would escape the battery is more likely to flee rather than engage; but the critic who would escape by engaging and overcoming is liable to meet her match. \
\
Again, while this may be infuriating, it is a sign of greatness. \
\
### Concluding remarks \
\
MacIntyre\'92s work is difficult to pick apart and summarize or critique in fragments. The compressions of his orchestral arguments in this chapter are inevitably going to leave some readers dissatisfied, perhaps even dismayed, by what (I have made it appear that) he is saying. Readers are of course invited to revisit the source. \
\
But if my summaries have captured with any accuracy the outline\'92s of MacIntyre\'92s contribution to virtue ethics, then we can say a few things with some confidence: virtue is, for MacIntyre, primarily an acquired human trait that enables its bearer to achieve characteristically human goods that are necessarily related to human life; secondarily, we may call virtues or virtue-like those qualities that enable their bearers to achieve goods internal to social and individual practices. Practices are in part constituted by their practitioners \'97 biologists can change what biology is from within; farmers can advance what it means to farm. But practices are also constitutive of traditions. Traditions are, again, are socially embedded arguments playing out over time and across generations. \
\
Differing traditions explain differing accounts of virtue. Though MacIntyre\'92s career began in straightforward engagement in dialectical disputes about philosophical ethics, it turned a corner when he thought to treat ethical disagreement in a manner analogous to the way Kuhn treated scientific disagreement. The result of turning this corner \'97 MacIntyre\'92s own paradigm shift \'97 was an account wherein he argues (similarly to some postmodern philosophers) that malleable traditions define standards of rationality, justice, and virtue. But he also argues, to the chagrin of postmodernists, that traditions are answerable to the world, and can be falsified.  He argues that a thoroughgoing cultural relativism (or \'93tradition-relativism\'94?) is inadequate. Such a theory holds the promise to explain why various cultures disagree about what qualities are virtues (humility or pride? acquisitiveness or contentment?) and why the same culture disagrees over time with itself about what exactly defines a particular virtue (is chastity moderation of sexual pleasure or just abstinence?) \
\
Though MacIntyre\'92s theories are built on many implicit assumptions, each of which a critic might make explicit and dispute, the conclusion we have found some reason to believe is that virtues are qualities inherently related to the teleology of practice. Human life, action, and practice are all teleological or end-directed. A philosophical ethics built on mere legalism says that some actions are inherently wrong in violating moral laws, or inherently irrational in violating laws of practical reason. Such legalism runs the risk of ignoring or denying the teleological dimension of practice. A philosophical ethics built on mere consequences says that some actions tend to be wrong in that they tend to produce undesirable or unhappy consequences. \
\
\
Now, MacIntyre later changed his mind about the "metaphysical biology" objection. He later thought that it could be answered a second time, even more strongly. It is not just *social teleology* that necessarily exists as part of our human nature; teleology is in some sense part of non-human nature as well. He came to accept the Thomistic and ultimately Aristotelian argument that natural causes include both efficient/material causes and formal/final. He, along with many others, came to believe that modern science has succeeded *in part because of* an enduring belief in final causation or natural teleology, not because of a rejection. The story about scientists dispensing with final causes in biology and astronomy and chemistry is largely a myth. Scientists and philosophers of science abound who can give empirical and rational grounds for thinking nature is riddled with final causation. \
\
MacIntyre's *ethical* case does not depend on this more robust account of natural teleology. All it needs is social teleology. But if it turned out that social teleology was in *instance* of natural teleology -- that the ends of human nature were a type of the ends of nature per se -- then the framework in which virtues enable the achievement of human ends would certainly be given additional credibility. \
\
Making the case on behalf of natural teleology I shall not do here. That is a task for the next chapter. }