{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs20 \cf0 ### Tradition\
For an essential piece of MacIntyre's ethical theorizing is that every enquirer inhabits a tradition. What does this mean? First, we must take the point in its least controversial and hence most trivial sense: each enquirer is an embodied human being, living in a particular time, place, and social setting, speaking  -- and perhaps thinking -- in a given language. \
\
What is a tradition? "A living tradition . . . is an historically extended, socially embodied argument\'85"[@macintyre1984after 222]. The content of a tradition is partly self-reflexive: it is "\'85  an argument precisely in part about the goods which constitute that tradition." Traditions derive from a source text and continue across generations via normal sociological channels (schools, friendships, political institutions, etc.). So, for example, by MacIntyre's lights Judaism is a tradition rooted in a source text (the Torah) and continuing across generations through arguments carried out in synagogues, universities, and so on about how to best interpret and apply the Torah, the whole Tanakh, the Talmud, and later commentaries. Also history-writing is a tradition, rooted in source texts such as Herodotus, and Thucydides, Gibbon and extending through Europe and the western world, consisting of a series of historical and historiographical arguments over not just "what happened" but how to conduct historical enquiry. \
\
With all this said, MacIntyre assumes that "we" inhabit a tradition. Some readers may object: Do \'93we\'94 (Anglo-Americans in particular or westerners in general) inhabit a \'93tradition\'94 at all? MacIntyre argues that we do. What tradition is it supposed to be? It is variously titled: liberalism, modern liberalism, modernity, Enlightenment modernity. (Liberalism does not correlate to the contemporary political division between \'93conservatives\'94 and \'93liberals.\'94 Rather, liberalism in this sense encompasses both contemporary \'93liberals\'94 and \'93conservatives\'94.) For simplicity, in most instances I shall use the simple term \'91modernity\'92 to describe this tradition. \
\
In the (1990) Gifford Lectures, MacIntyre presented three rival versions of moral inquiry as expressions of three rival traditions.[@macintyre1990three] A book was later made of these lectures. Richard Rorty wrote that the book \'93deepens and defends MacIntyre\'92s claim that genuinely rational enquiry requires membership in a particular type of moral community. He offers the most persuasive recent restatement of the Thomist position on the relation of metaphysics to morality.\'94 What are the \'93three rival versions\'94? He labels them \'91genealogy,\'92 \'91encyclopedia\'92, and \'91tradition\'92. Now, the use of the single word \'91tradition\'92 to mean both the genus (with three species) *and* one of those three species is deadly confusing, so I propose to call the third tradition 'Thomism'.\
\
The three are defined by their respective attitudes toward the past. Thomists use the past as a basis for building upon and yet transcending the past. \
\
Thomists think, in advance, that those in the future will use the present as a foundation for building upon and yet transcending the present. \
\
Genealogists use the past to subvert and \'93debunk\'94 the present. Genealogists think, in advance, that no one in the future can use the present as a foundation. The genealogist par excellence is Frederich Nietzsche, but Freud and Marx count as well. Stephen Lutz says: \
\
>The \'93Nietzschean research program\'94 has three uses for history: (1) to reduce academic history to a projection of the concerns of modern historians, (2) to dissipate the identity of the historian into a collection of inherited cultural influences, and (3) to undermine the notion of \'93progress towards truth and reason\'94 (3RV, pp. 49-50). In short, Genealogy denies the teleology of human enquiry by denying (1) that historical enquiry has been fruitful, (2) that the enquiring person has a real identity, and (3) that enquiry has a real goal. MacIntyre finds this mode of enquiry incoherent.[@lutz2015]\
\
Encyclopedists use the present to denigrate and \'93debunk\'94 the past. Encyclopedists think, in advance, that no one in the future will ever be able to transcend the present; they think we have *arrived*. The encyclopedist par excellence is the ninth edition of the *Encyclopedia Brittanica*, about which one reviewer said:\
\
>The *Britannica* represents the idea of an impersonal, universal, tradition-free conception of rational enquiry into morals, telling a story of the progress of reason in philosophy an the sciences through an appeal to timeless, universal principles of rationality. The encyclopedic tradition holds moral enquiry to be about an autonomous, distinct realm of human life, which can and must be understood solely in its own terms." \
\
An exemplary encyclopedist is Adam Lord Gifford (1820\'961887) himself. Gifford was a senator of the College of Justice in Scotland and inaugurated these prestigious lectures to represent the \'93state of the art\'94 of all knowledge. For reasons we shall discuss, MacIntyre thinks this version of rational enquiry is doomed. Nevertheless "it still exercises an extraordinary influence on contemporary thought and on university curricula."[@pinkard1991three] \
\
Now, modernity is an encyclopedic tradition. I was educated in a modern university on modern fare, as were my readers (I presume). So, by MacIntyre\'92s lights, we are \'93encyclopedists.\'94 Our source texts are Hume, Kant, Newton, Locke, and others. Ours is a tradition extended through time and socially embedded in the U.S., Canada, England and parts of Ireland and Scotland. The encyclopedic tradition is not narrow; it is indeed *encyclopedic*. It has political, scientific, religious, and philosophical aspects. The intellectual tradition of modernity arises alongside the rise of the modern state. We do well to remember that almost all the luminaries of the Enlightenment philosophy also wrote on politics: Mill\'92s ethical writings are almost always written with an eye to reformer civil law; Kant wrote books like *Perpetual Peace*; John Locke wrote about perception and understanding but also treatises on government. Within modernity, we analytic philosophers have further source texts in Russell, Frege, and Wittgenstein, instigating arguments over how to best conduct philosophical enquiry, the definition of analytic philosophy, and the relationship between language and thought.}