{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 # Alasdair MacIntyre: Virtue and Reason in Practice \
\
This chapter analyzes Alasdair MacIntyre's theory of virtue and practical rationality.[^1] MacIntyre (born 1929) is often classified as a "virtue ethicist" but he rejects the label insofar as it suggests an essentially modern moral virtue ethics rather than a real restoration of the Aristotelian tradition of virtue. Nevertheless, he has contributed to virtue ethics, as well as a surprising number of other fields: the history of philosophy, political science, epistemology, the philosophy of education, sociology, and more. His work often draws on sociology, psychology, and literature for its themes and illustrations. For example, he paints a memorable picture of emotivism as a \'93culture\'94 with its own paradigmatic \'93characters\'94: the Manager and the Therapist.[@macintyre1984after chapter 3] In a word, he embodies the ideal Roy Sellars commended, that the philosopher \'93should be well-grounded both in the history of philosophy and in the sciences, and... should engage philosophically with the major moral, social, and political issues of the day.\'94[@mcdonoughroy] \
\
\
Due in part to his multifaceted oeuvre, MacIntyre has had an enormous interdisciplinary influence. His eighteen books and greater than three hundred published articles have had an indelible impact on moral and political philosophy. Jack Weinstein observes that Macintyre did for ethics what John Rawls did for political philosophy. Rawls re-invigorated political philosophy, \'93inaugurating the dominance of late twentieth-century liberalism.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 38] MacIntyre re-invigorated analytic ethical philosophy, inaugurating the ascendence of late twentieth-century virtue ethics.[@weinstein2003macintyre chapter 4.] Some find his critiques and his conclusions radical. They may be radical, but they are certainly popular. He has been widely read, both inside and outside the university. He states without irony that his ideal audience is "small farmers, fishermen (and women), schoolteachers who refuse to become bureaucratic functionaries, those who retain ideals of craftsmanship in manual or mental labor and members of cooperatives aimed at remedying hunger or homelessness."[@weinstein2003macintyre 8.] In other words, he writes to academics and to regular folks. It is unclear what MacIntyre's final contribution to philosophy will be.  Those familiar with the expansiveness of his research will not be too quick to declare that his evolution is finished. \
\
[^1]: MacIntyre's ethical theory is best presented in the \'93*After Virtue* Project\'94, which consists of *After Virtue* (1984), *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* (1988); *Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry* (1990); and *Dependent Rational Animals* (1999). \
\
### MacIntyre's history and project ###\
\
My goal in this chapter is to present, analyze, and defend MacIntyre's theory of virtue and practical rationality. However, because of his emphasis on history and narrative, it would be wise to view MacIntyre's theory in light of his intellectual biography. This will introduce two major themes: history and tradition. \
\
MacIntyre grew up inside two cultures: a rustic Scottish fishing culture and an elite Scottish intellectual culture. For this reason, in part, his theory emphasizes the importance of being able to understand multiple cultures. He attended Epsom College at age sixteen where he was tutored by R. G. Collinwood. He acquired an interest in ethics during undergraduate study and wrote his M.A. thesis critiquing the emotivism of C. L. Stevenson. But the trouble he found with emotivism was also the trouble with other modern moral philosophies. \
\
One of MacIntyre\'92s enduring themes is that we all inhabit a tradition. His critique of modernity is a critique of a tradition, and his eventual solution is the Aristotelian tradition of virtue. Yet the concept is liable to fatal misunderstanding. I should be cutting off the Hydra\'92s immortal head if I were to explain 'tradition' at the outset. What does it mean to assert that \'93we all inhabit a tradition\'94? Most trivially, it means each of us are embodied, live in a time, place, and social setting, and speak a given language. More interestingly, it means that each of us (intellectuals at least) owe our conceptual resources to a tradition. What is a tradition? "A living tradition . . . is an historically extended, socially embodied argument\'85"[@macintyre1984after 222]. The content of a tradition is partly self-reflexive: it is "\'85 an argument precisely in part about the goods which constitute that tradition." Traditions derive from a source text and continue across generations via normal sociological channels (schools, friendships, political institutions, etc.). So, for example, by MacIntyre's lights Judaism is a tradition rooted in a source text (the Torah) and continuing across generations through arguments carried out in synagogues, universities, and so on about how best to interpret and apply the Torah, the whole Tanakh, the Talmud, and later commentaries. Also history-writing is a tradition, rooted in source texts such as Herodotus, Thucydides, and Gibbon and extending through Europe and the western world, consisting of a series of historical and historiographical arguments over not just "what happened" but how to conduct historical enquiry. \
\
Even if this notion of tradition is clear (I shall discuss it much more below), some readers may object: Do \'93we\'94 (Anglo-Americans in particular or westerners in general) inhabit a \'93tradition\'94 at all? MacIntyre argues that we do. What tradition is it supposed to be? It is variously titled: liberalism, modern liberalism, Enlightenment modernity, or simply modernity. It is not politically left-leaning or liberal in the contemporary sense but includes right-leaning conservatives as well. For simplicity, in most instances I shall simply use the term \'91modernity\'92 to describe this tradition. \
\
MacIntyre\'92s most thorough treatment of the theme of how traditions conduct moral enquiry is the (1990) Gifford Lectures. There he presents three \'93rival versions of moral enquiry.\'94 They are \'91genealogy,\'92 \'91encyclopedia\'92, and a third version he simply calls \'91tradition\'92 but I will call \'91Thomism.\'92 The three rivals are defined by their respective attitudes toward the past. For example, genealogists use the past to subvert and \'93debunk\'94 the present. Genealogists think, in advance, that no one in the future can use the present as a foundation. The genealogist par excellence is Frederich Nietzsche, but Freud and Marx count as well. Stephen Lutz says: \
\
>The \'93Nietzschean research program\'94 has three uses for history: (1) to reduce academic history to a projection of the concerns of modern historians, (2) to dissipate the identity of the historian into a collection of inherited cultural influences, and (3) to undermine the notion of \'93progress towards truth and reason\'94 (3RV, pp. 49-50). In short, genealogy denies the teleology of human enquiry by denying (1) that historical enquiry has been fruitful, (2) that the enquiring person has a real identity, and (3) that enquiry has a real goal. MacIntyre finds this mode of enquiry incoherent.[@lutz2015]\
\
By contrast, encyclopedists use the present to denigrate and \'93debunk\'94 the past. Encyclopedists think, in advance, that no one in the future will ever be able to transcend the present; they think we have *arrived*. The encyclopedist par excellence is the ninth edition of the *Encyclopedia Brittanica*, about which one reviewer said:\
\
>The *Britannica* represents the idea of an impersonal, universal, tradition-free conception of rational enquiry into morals, telling a story of the progress of reason in philosophy and the sciences through an appeal to timeless, universal principles of rationality. The encyclopedic tradition holds moral enquiry to be about an autonomous, distinct realm of human life, which can and must be understood solely in its own terms.\
\
Another exemplary encyclopedist is Adam Lord Gifford (1820\'961887) himself. Gifford was a senator of the College of Justice in Scotland and inaugurated these prestigious lectures to represent the \'93state of the art\'94 of all knowledge. \
\
MacIntyre's conviction is that we, even we anti-traditional moderns, inhabit a tradition. Yet we are not trapped by it. Members of a tradition are able to discover the inadequacies of their tradition and discover the resources of a rival tradition. This is just what happened to him. How did MacIntyre \'93deconvert\'94 from modernism? It began with ethics. What troubled him about emotivism in particular and modern metaethics in general was an assumption shared by emotivists, intuitionists, naturalists, and error theorists that moral terms are *referential.* If moral terms within moral judgments are supposed to pick out a property in the world, then either we must identify that property or (if we cannot) conclude that moral terms are literally meaningless. He argued that this assumption is a mistake. Instead, he concluded that the significance of moral judgments is that \'93they enable us to solve problems of appraisal and of action.\'94[@murphy2003macintyre 118, quoting MacIntyre\'92s master\'92s thesis *The Significance of Moral Judgments* p. 73] Instead of referring (or failing to refer) to a special 'moral property', all evaluative reasoning is practical reasoning. We employ moral judgments when we must evaluate something or when we must reason about what to do. Moral reasoning is not a special, mystical discipline divorced from prudential, instrumental, and other kinds of practical reasoning. Hence, there can be no adequate theory of ethics apart from a theory of (practical) rationality. \
\
Now, modernity is an encyclopedic tradition. It was the tradition MacIntyre was raised in. It is the tradition I was raised in, as (I presume) were my readers. So, by MacIntyre\'92s lights, we are \'93encyclopedists.\'94 Our source texts are Hume, Kant, Newton, Locke, and others. Ours is an argument extended through time and socially embedded in the U.S., Canada, the U.K., and parts of western Europe. Modernity has political, scientific, religious, and philosophical aspects; it is indeed *encyclopedic*. The intellectual tradition of modernity arises alongside the rise of the modern state. We do well to remember that almost all the luminaries of Enlightenment philosophy also wrote on politics: Mill\'92s ethical writings are almost always written with an eye to reforming civil law; Kant wrote the three *Critiques* but also the *Perpetual Peace*; John Locke wrote about perception and understanding but also treatises on government. \
\
As a member of the modern tradition, he gradually discovered its inadequacies. His attempt to trace the root of the mistake about moral judgments lead him to a mistake at the heart of Enlightenment modernity. As a social, political, and moral project, the Enlightenment has been, MacIntyre argues, a failure by its own standards. One of his most memorable and oft-cited images compares modern moral discourse to the hypothetical state of scientific discourse in a post-apocalyptic catastrophe. Only decaying fragments of intelligible moral discourse survive: \
\
>Imagine that the natural sciences were to suffer the effects of a catastrophe...Widespread riots occur, laboratories are burnt down, physicists are lynched, books and instruments are destroyed. Finally a Know-Nothing political movement takes power and successfully abolishes science teaching in schools and universities, imprisoning and executing the remaining scientists. Later still there is a reaction against this destructive movement and enlightened people seek to revive science, although they have largely forgotten what it was. But all that they possess are fragments: a knowledge of experiments detached from any knowledge of the theoretical context which gave them significance... all these fragments are reembodied in a set of practices which go under the revived names of physics, chemistry and biology. Adults argue with each other about the respective merits of relativity theory, evolutionary theory and phlogiston theory, although they possess only a very partial knowledge of each. Children learn by heart the surviving portions of the periodic table and recite as incantations some of the theorems of Euclid. Nobody, or almost nobody, realizes that what they are doing is not natural science in any proper sense at all.[@macintyre1984after 1]\
\
The picture here captures the state of moral discourse. But an obvious symptom of the decay of moral discourse and social unity is interminable ethical disagreement.[@macintyre1984after 6] Moral discourse is largely devoted to moral disagreement, and moral disagreement is largely soaked in despair of ever reaching agreement. Neither side wants to give up the *appearance* of having a dialectical case for its value theory. Moral discourse with its interminable moral disagreement retains the rhetorical *trappings* of rationality and objectivity while denying rationality and objectivity. An explanation of this disagreement is that we are trying to get by using the scraps of a previous and whole moral tradition. MacIntyre thinks this version of rational enquiry, like genealogy, incoherent by its own standards. Nevertheless "it still exercises an extraordinary influence on contemporary thought and on university curricula."[@pinkard1991three]  The problem with modernity is not merely academic. The social and political fabric is woven from the thread of morality, so many of the ills of modern life can be traced to our inability to share a substantive conception of the good and the good life.  \
\
Due to his many critical works, MacIntyre earned a reputation as a "critic of modernity."[@mcmylor2005alasdair] But what is unusual about him is not his criticism but his eventual solution. There are many modern philosophers who have gone into similar crises. The become critics of the rationalism and foundationalism of modernity. Such become distrustful thought, language, and rationality itself; they become "the masters of suspicion."[@ricoeur1970freud. "Three masters, seemingly mutually exclusive, dominate the school of suspicion: Marx, Nietzche, and Freud." "]  MacIntyre took a surprising course. His crisis compelled him to draw on the resources of history and of contemporary philosophy and science to discover a more adequate answer to some philosophical problem. His criticisms lead him to find an older and still vital foundation amidst the ruins. It is upon this foundation -- the Aristotelian tradition of virtue -- that MacIntyre continues to build.\
\
The story of his avoidance of despair and deconstructionism is an interesting one. He was deeply moved by Thomas Kuhn's influential work on the structure of revolution between various paradigms in the natural sciences.[@kuhn1975structure] What if a similar structure obtained in scientific revolutions and in moral revolutions? Anyone familiar with Kuhn's watershed *Structure of Scientific Revolutions* has felt the significance of his provocative argument. MacIntyre began to speculate about the possibility that Kuhn's (and Feyerabend\'92s) analyses of scientific progress and scientific crisis could be fruitfully applied to ethics. His 1977 essay on epistemological crises was his own version of Kuhn's *Structure of Scientific Revolutions* -- we might call this essay MacIntyre's "Structure of Ethical Revolutions".[@macintyre1977epistemological] \
\
Now, Kuhn concluded his study in a radical pluralism about rationality and methodology. This smacks of a scientific relativism unpalatable to many scientific realists. Paul Feyerabend cheerfully embraced this possibility. He argued for "epistemological anarchism," where *any* method will do as long as it is "fruitful."[@feyerabend1993against] He thought that "rationality" and "science" were merely bully terms with sociological power to club dissenters from the dominant paradigm into submission. MacIntyre took a different tack. Kuhn's concept of a paradigm is a nice analogue for MacIntyre's concept of a tradition.\
\
MacIntyre's lifework has been an invitation to recover the tradition of virtues. But virtues are not free-floating moral concepts; they are embedded in a specific, living, moral tradition -- the Aristotelian tradition. This is one of MacIntyre's recurring themes: ethical concepts have *a history*. That is, we can only responsibly use or evaluate our own ethical terms and concepts when we have some historical perspective on them. Furthermore, *we* have a history. Practical concepts such as the self, practice, the *telos* or end of life, and virtue are all  MacIntyre realized that we all inhabit a tradition -- even putatively anti-traditionalist moderns. So we must know ourselves as members of a tradition, as members of a historically-extended social community with its own conceptual resources. These themes -- tradition have guided the construction of MacIntyre's virtue theory. \
\
\
These conclusions are, of course, tersely put. Our job in this chapter is to unpack them. And these conclusions are subject to various important objections. Our job is to articulate and respond to (some of) them.  \
\
But it is worth saying at the outset that MacIntyre readers fall into two broad camps: those who are, on the whole, more critical of modernity, and those who, on the whole, are less critical of modernity. The former group tend to find MacIntyre's diagnosis compelling and his solutions exhilarating.  Restoring historical perspective on ethics, restoring ethical reasoning to its place within practical reasoning, and restoring *telos* promises to make available the resources of the older, Aristotelian tradition of virtue. The hope of a restored morality brings with it the hope of a restoration of social and political integrity. MacIntyre invites such readers to see the point of education, politics, and social life once again the acquisition and exercise of virtues, to restore an intelligibility to these activities and pursuits that many of us moderns can hardly imagine. \
\
The latter group tend to find MacIntyre's criticisms excessively polemical and his solutions needlessly radical. He invites such readers to reflect on themselves and on our common history. But even if there is nothing of interest in his criticisms and solutions, they are invited to consider his solutions in a spirit of philosophical imagination. "*If* modernity had these fatal flaws, would this solution be a good one?"\
\
### Chapter outline ###\
\
This chapter is divided into four sections. \
\
**Section 1: Virtue**.  Section 1 summarizes and discusses MacIntyre\'92s theory of virtue and practical rationality as presented in his four main virtue books. I shall present his definition of virtue, and discuss six supporting concepts. They are: practice, self, *telos*, human nature, tradition-constituted rationality, and *phronesis* or practical wisdom.\
\
**Section 2: Objections**. Section 2 presents a sampling of the powerful objections critics -- modernists, postmodernists, and MacIntyre\'92s own fellow Thomists -- have offered to various aspects of MacIntyre\'92s theory. It will be impossible to do justice to the excellent replies from MacIntyre's sizable crowd of friends and opponents. Instead I shall focus on three families of superlatively important objections. The first family of objections pertains to moral relativism and perspectivism. Is MacIntyre successful in defending the Aristotelian tradition of moral realism? The second family of objections pertains to his concept of tradition-constituted rationality. Is his theory of rationality even coherent? Is it clear enough? And can *it* avoid the charge of relativism? The third family of objections pertains to teleology. In attempting to shoehorn teleology back into ethics, is MacIntyre accepting tenets from a discredited Aristotelian metaphysics of nature? Can't modern morality get along well enough without *telos*? \
\
**Section 3: Discussion**. Section 3 discusses these objections and offers answers. While I cannot promise to calm the legitimate worries of his critics, I argue that each of these three families of objections can be answered satisfactorily. Many of the worries about relativism are misunderstandings. If a relativistic thesis claims that no one person\'92s or culture\'92s conception of virtue is rationally superior to any other\'92s, MacIntyre's theory can avoid this. Secondly, his notion of tradition-constituted rationality may cause frustration since it is open to interpretation (by philosophers from varying traditions) but this is not a mark against it; rather, the notion satisfyingly accounts for the paradox that there is both widespread moral disagreement *and* widespread moral agreement. Thirdly, MacIntyre's notion of teleology is credible within our modern scientific context, since all it requires is a recognition of "social teleology", which can be easily adduced by reflection on our actions and our lives. Furthermore, if some modern theories (such as Kantian deontology) are teleological, then they are in fundamental harmony with MacIntyre's theory. But consequentialism is not properly teleological if it views all relations between actions and consequences as contingent.\
\
**Section 4: Conclusion**. Section 4 reviews the terrain covered and cleans up a few remaining points. First, I shall close this chapter with a reflection on why some critics don't just disagree but are infruriated by MacIntyre\'92s philosophical ethics. I shall argue that we should expect any \'93answer\'94 to such fundamental worries to expose deep metaphilosophical fault lines. I shall caution MacIntyre\'92s allies and enemies to be cautious about hastily labeling each other as \'93unphilosophical\'94 on the basis of an inability \'97 at the moment \'97 of finally adjudicating these disputes. The same features of his theory that infuriate some magnetically fascinate others and so reflection on them may, I believe, illuminate MacIntyre\'92s distinctive legacy. \
\
\
## Rational Virtue in Practice\
\
I can now present MacIntyre's account of virtue. First, I shall reflect on his initial definition of virtue, which is derived from a careful study of the history of the concept within the broader western tradition. Secondly, I explore the expanding definition in light of supporting concepts: *practices* are social activities in which virtues are acquired and used; The *self* is what acquires virtues and vices; *telos* is necessary to define the contrast with the way we are now and the way we ought to be if we were fully "realized" or fulfilled as persons; *practical rationality* is the defining feature of humans as dependent animals; similiarly, *phronesis* or practical wisdom bears a special relationship to all the other virtues. This complete account of virtue and practical rationality, I think, powerfully captures the phenomena of human life, and so lends support to MacIntyre\'92s conviction that humans are "dependent rational animals" who "need the virtues.\'94[@macintyre1999dependent] \
\
### An initial definition of virtue\
\
MacIntyre's first definition of virtue is that virtues are \'93acquired human qualities that enable their possessor to achieve those goods which are internal to practices."[@macintyre1984after 191]  A few initial comments are in order about each phrase of this definition. First, virtues are acquired *human* qualities, presumably opposed to analogous qualities of lower animals. Formal or functional qualities that enable an animal to survive and thrive (e.g., the flexible flagellum of the bacterium, the swiftness of a deer) are excluded from the class of virtues by definition. MacIntyre's later  *Dependent Rational Animals* retracts the assumed divide between human and non-human animals. I revisit that retraction below. \
\
Secondly, virtues are *acquired* human qualities. In the first line of Plato's *Meno*, Meno asks Socrates a question that moral philosophers have continued to try to answer for the last 2,400 years. He asks "whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice; or if neither by teaching nor practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"[@plato, *Meno* 70a] MacIntyre's answer is not that virtue is a gift of the gods, but that it is *acquired.* This is important because, as a recent volume edited by Mark Alfano[@alfano2015current] discusses, one important question for virtue ethicists is the range of what positive traits count as virtues. MacIntyre, it would seem, limits the range to exclude inborn or genetically determined qualities like a good memory or excellent eyesight from being considered virtues. In this, he agrees with Aristotle that virtue is *in accordance with* nature but not *by nature*. That is, we might say, virtues do not arise "automatically" but also are not acquired by working against the grain of our human nature. Rather, they can be seen as a "normal" psychological outgrowth of cultivating excellence within particular human practices. \
\
Thirdly, virtues enable their possessor to achieve particular *goods.* This point assumes that virtues are beneficial. A virtuous trait *cannot* be directed at achieving ills. This assumption will bring some trouble for MacIntyre's initial definition in *After Virtue*. Can't overall wicked people have particular virtues? Can't the thief be courageous, the dictator magnanimous, the glutton affable? It certainly seems that the answer is yes. I shall discuss this point a bit more in discussing *phronesis*. \
\
A second implicit point is that virtues here seem to be defined instrumentally. A grave misunderstanding lurks in the vicinity. Virtues *are* instrumental for MacIntyre, but they are not *merely* instrumental. They are both instrumental (to the achievement of certain goods) and also *partly constitutive of those goods.* Virtues are both means to an end and also ends in themselves. *Phronesis* or practical wisdom, for example, enables agents to make good decisions that result in human flourishing but having *phronesis* *just is part of the definition* of flourishing. Now, this conflation of means/ends is liable to worry some critics. The worry exposes important fault lines. For the sake of completing my presentation of virtue, I must set it aside until the discussion of teleology below.  \
\
Fourthly, MacIntyre defines virtues with reference goods internal to *practices*. Practice is a key term of art within MacIntyre's theory of virtue. To misunderstand 'practice' would be to misunderstand MacIntyre. So with these initial comments in hand, I shall more deeply explore MacIntyre's unfolding account of virtue in the following sub-sections. Each section will elaborate on one of the following interlocking components: practice, self, *telos*, human nature, tradition-constituted rationality, and *phronesis* or practical wisdom.\
\
MacIntyre's entire philosophical methodology is exemplified in how he defines \'91virtue\'92. He begins with Homeric virtues (roughly, the performance of one\'92s social role) and works through the implicit or explicit definitions of virtue in Plato, Aristotle, the Greek tragic poets, the New Testament, Aquinas, Jane Austen, and Benjamin Franklin. From this historical study, he abstracts an account that is historical but not restricted to history; it aims to be universal but does not pretend to be purely abstract. His concept of virtue is, rather, *traditional*. \
\
### Practice ###\
\
What is a practice? A practice is a social activity aimed at defined ends. (We commonly speak of "practicing" medicine in this sense.) Each practice has a history, a set of practitioners, a common set of standards, and a common goal. MacIntyre mentions chess, farming, and political activity as examples *inter alia*. A practice is not merely a reflexive action (like scratching an itch) nor merely a single, discrete, intelligible action (like pulling a weed); it is an intelligible set of actions such as tilling, sowing, watering, protecting, harvesting, storing, etc., all embedded within a social context and organized around a particular goal. \
\
For example, farming is a social activity undertaken (let's say) for the sake of producing sufficient quantities of edible food for the farmer, the farmer's family, and the general marketplace. (This example is not intended to be controversial \'97 please overlook any factual mistakes on the details.) Farming as a practice has a history or series of cultural histories, a set of farmers who belong to it or practice it, and a common set of standards that define good and bad farming.  \
\
Leading MacIntyre scholar, Christopher Lutz, analyzes MacIntyre\'92s famous passage into the following four aspects. A practice is: \
\
>[1] a complex social activity that [2] enables participants to gain goods internal to the practice. [3] Participants achieve excellence in practices by gaining the internal goods. When participants achieve excellence, [3] the social understandings of excellence in the practice, of the goods of the practice, and of the possibility of achieving excellence in the practice are systematically extended.[@lutz2015] \
\
As this explication makes clear, practices are inherently *social*; they are *teleological* in that they have settled aims; they are necessarily have a *history* and social context that is being "extended" across generations. \
\
Lutz also makes clear that MacIntyre\'92s notion of virtue and practice is tied to the goods \'93internal to\'94 practices. MacIntyre later refashions the contrast between 'internal' and 'externa' goods into one between 'goods of excellence' and 'goods of effectiveness.'' The point is, I think, clear. The goods of excellence in farming are just those that *necessarily constitute success within a given practice as such*: the production of good food, edible food, nutritious food, etc. (Of course, not all farmers aim to produce comestibles, but I am generalizing.) Virtues are needed for the goods of excellence, which might include strength, dexterity with equipment, sensitivity to service animals, etc. Without these, excellence in farming is unachievable. \
\
The internal goal of farming is (by my hypothesis) the production of edible food; its practitioners *as farmers* are committed to this goal without any eye toward broader features of farming as a business. The practice of farming demands specific virtues. A farmer must be honest in order to maintain positive relationships with various suppliers and buyers; a farmer must be courageous, willing to withstand real pain and risk possible harm for the sake of the good being pursued, in order to face unseasonable weather, illness, or other misfortune. \
\
By contrast, goods of effectiveness are those that might result from the practice but are not necessary parts: fame, fortune, good friends, physical fitness. Mere efficiency in attaining such external goods does not entail the presence of a virtue. In fact, the desire to pursue external goods in the course of engaging in a practice is not just a neutral desire \'97 it is a *temptation.* Virtues are needed to overcome those temptations and to succeed at political activity, judging \'93success\'94 only by the standards defined within practice itself. \
\
An illustrative example is political activity. People are motivated to undertake political activity by both excellence and mere effectiveness. That is, some people engage in political activity *in order to bring about* the survival, security, and prosperity of the *polis*. But a sadly large proportion of others engage in order merely to satisfy their own ambition or achieve fame. Often we see American politicians running for office only one apparent aim: book sales. \
\
As I see it, virtue defined by practice can already be significantly contrasted against mere *happiness* or *pleasure* as found in Mill, and against mere *duty* or *good will* as found in Kant. On the one hand, the standards by which farmers judge each other are not static and universal formal laws. They are \'93contentful,\'94 immanent, flexible standards. On the other hand, the standards by which practitioners judge each other are not all \'93external\'94 ; they are not merely an arbitrary set of social conventions. Farmers cannot get together and decide farming is no longer about husbandry but is about selling land along highways for billboard advertisements. The practice itself, with its history and its aims, has a structure that is persists across generations and flexes, but does not break, with varying standards. That structure is passed along, modified, but modified according to an inner logic. \
\
Many have agreed with Elizabeth Anscombe\'92s characterization of consequentialism more generally that it views all consequences merely contingent goods. Such a view reduces all goods (except happiness itself) as goods of effectiveness. She puts the point in this way: \
\
>Now the consequentialist has no footing on which to say "This would be permissible, this not"; because by his own hypothesis, it is the consequences that are to decide, and he has no business to pretend that he can lay it down what possible twists a man could give doing this or that; the most he can say is: a man must not bring about this or that; he has no right to say he will, in an actual case, bring about such-and-such unless he does so-and-so.[@anscombe1958 13] \
\
I shall return to this discussion of such contingent goods in the discussion of teleology below.\
\
### Self ###\
\
MacIntyre's account of virtue begins in terms of practices. Virtues sustain and eventually improve practices while vices enervate and eventually ruin them. A second layer of his account in *After Virtue* defines virtues as those qualities that benefit human beings in the quest of human life.[@macintyre1984after chapter 15.] Humans perform practices; humans are the bearers of virtues and vices. But what is a human self?\
\
The Enlightenment picture of selfhood, personality, or agency is a radical divergence from the prior tradition. The Enlightenment thinkers (such as Kant) and their heirs (such as Rawls) conceive the self as the "empty self."\
\
\
or Enlightenment thinkers (such as Kant) and their heirs (such as John Rawls), the self is not naturally constrained by inherent teleology or inherent sociality. Such thinkers celebrate the empty self. The elimination of these strictures seem an increase in freedom. In the modernist picture, I am a moral subject. I am a self among other selves. My present self is a time slice of my overall total self (through time), I am able to know facts and value values, I have my own good separate and apart from your good and that of my family and community and society.  \
\
The Enlightenment concept is the empty self. The self is not social *by nature*; it is atomic by nature and only social by choice, or contract, or artifice. The empty self does not have a history; the body arises from a biological history but the self emerges as it were from nowhere, suddenly possessed of detached freedom. The empty self does not have a naturally-ordained destiny; it is self-determining, self-legislating, and ultimately self-creating. John Horton and Susan Mendus summarize the contrast well enough to quote them in full:\
\
>Where Aristotle understood man as a creature with a definite function which he might fulfill or deny, modern morality sees man simply as a rational agent who has no true or definable purpose independent of his own will... By appealing to a *telos*, Aristotle was able to distinguish between the way we actually are and the way we should be. His conception of human beings as having a specific *telos* brought with it the possibility that we might fall short of the ideal... But with the rejection of Aristotelianism gain the rejection of any such distinction between what we are and what we should be. Post-Enlightenment man is seen as governed, not by a *telos* external to him, but simply by the dictates of his own inner reason... Thus the abandonment of an Aristotelian conception of the good has not only left us without standards by which to evaluate our moral arguments, it is also cast us adrift in the moral world. For Aristotle, a conception of the good for man has an essentially societal dimension.[@horton2015 6] \
\
\
But the Enlightenment picture of the empty self is, MacIntyre thinks, disastrously wrong. The strictures do not result in increased freedom but increase in anxiety and despair. On this issue, MacIntyre argues the standard communitarian line.[Cf. @taylor1985atomism] The detachable empty self, divorced from past and from community is not the real self.  While this section is not the place to adjudicate this dispute, a two comments are worth making to clarify and help to justify MacIntyre\'92s location on the conceptual map. The first is the sociological and anthropological point that each of us belongs by nature to a family (via genetics) and a culture (via upbringing). There are no Tarzans or Mowglis raised outside of a particular culture. Rather, it is in social institutions (clubs, churches, schools, guilds, towns) that practices are learned, taught, preserved, extended. In social conditions we develop what virtues we may possess and what vices we may suffer from. We are trained in cowardice and vice by "corrupt traditions.\'94[@macintyre1984after 223] \
\
The second is the observation that *we do bear* responsibility for the actions of our ancestors. One example likely to be persuasive to modern liberal thinkers is that of  slavery. A present day black American's identity is in part defined by the relationship of 18th century blacks to 18th century whites. Similarly, present day Irishman's identity is in part defined by the relationship of 18th century Englishman to the 18th century Irish slaves. If the notion of the detachable self were true, then my personal identity would have nothing to do with the trials and triumphs of those in the past; I could justly deny any part in pre-existing structures. But it seems that each of us takes an identity, at least in part, from our past and from our tradition. \
\
It will come as no surprise that MacIntyre\'92s view of the self, the narrative of life, the end of humanity, ethics, and rationality itself come to be built on the notion of *telos*, restored to its proper place. In the traditional picture, I am a moral subject. I am a self among other selves. In the present, I owe my being and personhood to the past (especially my family who biologically gave me being) and psychologically and culturally to my tradition. I am able to know truth, for there is only one manifold of truths. My good is that of my community; my community\'92s good is that of mine. These data are fundamental. \
\
### *Telos* ### \
\
In the seminal text of the \'93Aristotelian tradition\'94, the *Nicomachean Ethics*, MacIntyre finds the view that humans \'93like the members of all other species, have a specific nature; and that nature is such that they have certain aims and goals, such that they move by nature towards a specific *telos*. The good is defined in terms of their specific characteristics\'94.[@macintyre1984after 148] For Aristotle the virtues are \'93precisely those qualities the possession of which will enable an individual to achieve eudaemonia and the lack of which will frustrate his movement toward that *telos*.\'94[@macintyre1984after 148]\
\
We can see that Aristotle\'92s account includes these ingredients, all of which interlock with the others to form a coherent picture of a human being or community being excellent at life. (A) Human nature is part of nature; and for Aristotle \'93nature\'94 extends to include formal, final, material, and efficient causes. Also, our end and (to some degree) the qualities that enable us to achieve that end are natural to us. (B) The virtues are those qualities that enable persons and communities to achieve their end, which is eudaemonia. (D) The *telos* of humanity is its (natural) final cause, its end. Eudaemonia is not pleasure, not wealth, not just wisdom, but virtuous activity.\
\
For MacIntyre, the loss of *telos* (human-nature-as-it-should-be) is one of the chief if not the chief error of Enlightenment moralities. Human-nature-as-it-is is a topic for both philosophers and social scientists: psychologists, sociologists, anthropologists, etc. But *telos* unifies human nature as it is with ethical principles and realistic ideals by which we can become something other than what we are at present. \
\
It is difficult to understate the importance of this point about the self and its relation to not only virtue theory but ethical theory itself. Edward Oakes describes the removal of *telos* from our worldview as \'93perhaps the greatest category mistake ever made in the history of philosophy.\'94\
\
>That word \'93teleological\'94 is the key to MacIntyre\'92s solution, the loss of which is the cause of the catastrophe described in his science-fiction parable. Teleology is the study of final causes, goals, purposes, and aims: a style of explanation that saturates Aristotle\'92s philosophy. After the combined impact of Newton and Darwin, however, this type of explanation seems mostly 'quaint' and once Aristotle\'92s science seemed quaint, his ethics soon followed: when Newton demonstrated how motion can be better explained as resulting from the outcome of mechanical laws, and when Darwin posited natural selection as the \'93mechanism\'94 for explaining an organ\'92s functionality, the use of teleology in ethics was doomed...Emptying moral discourse of teleological concepts because of the perceived impact of Newton and Darwin has been for MacIntyre the catastrophe of our times.[@oakes1996] \
\
MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue is \'93neo-Aristotelian\'94 in that it borrows from but also contrast with Aristotle\'92s. For instance, MacIntyre denies that Aristotle\'92s virtues are so timeless, abstract, and generically human as Aristotle would make them appear; they are partly indexed to fourth century, upper-class, educated Athenian culture. Instead, MacIntyre's provisional conception of our human *telos* is this:  \'93The good life for man is the life spent in seeking for the good life for man, and the virtues necessary for the seeking are those which will enable us to understand what more and what else the good life for man is."[@macintyre1984after 210] Our *telos* is to be free to pursue our *telos*. MacIntyre is not a straightforward eudaemonist; this conception of the human *telos* is more vague than Aristotle\'92s or Aquinas\'92s. He concludes that the human *telos* (whatever it might robustly turn out to be) includes minimally the freedom to explore "what else" the *telos* might be. It is not vacuous to conclude that the virtues needed to achieve this (extremely indeterminate) goal themselves indirectly make room for and might directly illumine \'93what else\'94 our *telos* consists in. The virtues needed to preserve the quest for the good, he suggests, may illumine \'93what else\'94 our *telos* consists in. It may turn out (and his later writings are more explicit about it) that the determinate *telos* of a given tradition is a more determinate conception of eudaemonia. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
I defer a full discussion of teleology until the next section. If we return to the concept of practice with the *teleological* and *social* properties firmly in mind, then MacIntyre's account becomes more clear. Farming is not a solitary and abstract activity but is always undertaken by farmers who apprenticed (under parents or mentors). Farmers who master the practice become not only beneficiaries but benefactors, and may innovate new or better ways of farming that can be passed on to the next apprentice or child. \
\
\
\
Thus far, we have seen that MacIntyre presents virtues as those qualities acquired by individual selves in the performance of practices that serve the intrinsic *teloi* or ends of those practices. \
\
### An initial worry \
\
Thus far, MacIntyre has argued that the modern conception of morality and the attendant conception of the self are fatally flawed; the restoration of virtue requires a restoration of human *telos* as the goal of life, and attention to practices by in which we develop virtues. One worry that many readers have shared is that MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue, thus far, is simply too relativistic: Is torture a \'93practice\'94? Or is grand theft auto a practice that one can be excellent at? MacIntyre admits in *After Virtue* that there *might* be evil practices. \
\
Furthermore, Martha Nussbaum and others worry that MacIntyre is simply defending hidebound conservatism. We can add that institutions or traditions can be evil.) If so, then some \'93virtues\'94 that enable the achievement of goods and the health and continuance of institutions would be bad qualities. MacIntyre's earlier theory cannot overcome this objection, Lutz argues. He says:\
\
>Unfortunately, the relativism of *After Virtue* cannot be overcome unless its definitions of the virtues are extended to embrace the Aristotelian and Thomistic doctrine of the unity of virtue. MacIntyre's rejection of the unity of virtue in *After Virtue* has grave implications for the rest of his virtue theory because the rejection of the unity of virtue divorces the intellectual moral virtue of prudence from the passional moral virtues of courage, temperence, and justice... Prudence becomes cleverness...The strength of MacIntyre's account of practices is that the pursuit of excellence in a practice entails the pursuit of virtue, but if practices can be evil, and virtues can 'enable us to achieve those goods which are internal to' such an evil practice, and virtues can be anything at all.[@lutz2004tradition 98-101]\
\
Lutz continues by examining the implications of divorcing intellectual and moral virtues: (1) "It constitues the rejection of the Aristotelian practical syllogism that MacIntyre wanted to recover in *After Virtue* because it separates prudent reasoning from virtuous action. (2) It evacuates all falsifiable substantive moral content from the virtues, reducing them to enabling qualities."[@lutz2004tradition 100] \
\
There have been ethical philosophers who endorse this kind of reductive virtue: Lutz mentions Edmund Pincoff.[@pincoffs1971quandary]  But the commonsense definition of "virtue" includes *goodness*. A virtue is, within our tradition, a quality *admirable for its own sake* or else a quality that enables its bearer to *achieve admirable goals*. \
\
For all that, MacIntyre vehemently denies being a relativist. \
\
He devotes the whole of *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* to capturing the truth in *relativity* while escaping relativism. To avoid relativism, he must say something to do justice to the assumption that virtues are not neutral with respect to ends, but are actually *good* for their possessor. He must put practice into a broader teleological context and question whether life *as a whole* can be virtuous. He does say that the virtue of \'93integrity or constancy\'85 of singleness of purpose in a whole life.\'94[@macintyre1984after 203] Integrity is not our *telos*, but it is a necessary condition. Even putting human life into a unified, narrative context does not ultimately solve the problem of relativism. For we still might worry: is there a single *telos* for human life? Is there a unity to all the virtues such that \'93wicked virtues\'94 can be excluded? And if so, is it rooted in our \'93metaphysical biology\'94 as Aristotle thought? \
\
A fuller discussion of relativism I return to below, clarifying the charge and rebutting it. For now, the charge of relativism effectively motivates MacIntyre\'92s third layer in the *After Virtue* account: practical rationality. \
\
### A second worry ###\
\
We must beware a misunderstanding. Any talk of \'93returning\'94 to virtue is liable to sound nostalgic. Martha Nussbaum is one of many who have fallen to this misunderstanding.[@nussbaum1989recoiling] She begins her review of *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* with an age-old dilemma between the social stability afforded by tradition (with its danger of hidebound error) and the social volatility endemic to critical reflection (with its opportunity of progress toward truth). She alludes to this dilemma as articulated by Aristotle: \
\
>In the second book of the Politics, Aristotle asks whether it is a good thing to encourage changes in society. Should people be offered rewards for inventing some change in the traditional laws? No, he writes, because this would lead to instability and unnecessary tampering with what is working well. Should we, on the other hand, listen to those who wish to keep ancestral traditions fixed and immune from criticism? No again\'97for if we reason well we can make progress in lawmaking, just as we do in other arts and sciences.[@nussbaum1989recoiling]\
\
Aristotle\'92s solution is that it should be hard but not impossible to change societal structures. Of course, we don\'92t have to pick just one or the other. But, putting it starkly, of the two it is better to risk instability (and gamble for progressing toward truth) than to risk hidebound error (and gamble for stability). \
\
Strangely, Nussbaum takes MacIntyre to be reversing Aristotle\'92s balance. She thinks MacIntyre is urging for betting on social stability even if it means sticking closer to existing tradition (and hence surpassing or intentionally avoiding critical reflection) than is compatible with unfettered progress.\
\
This is not an objection to MacIntyre \'97 it is a misreading. MacIntyre's proposed solution is not a sort of *anti-progressive* longing for the past. It is radically progressive. He rejected fideism and conservatism. His solution is not to reverse progress but to abandon the standard of progress set up in the Enlightenment and to continue under an alternative standard of progress. \
\
At the risk of sounding paradoxical, we might put it this way: MacIntyre's positive ethical positions are *traditional* but not *nostalgic.* In fact, his definition of tradition as an ongoing, socially-embedded argument over time entails necessarily that moral enquiry is dynamic, progressive, and even *modern*. For, to be traditional is not to be past-oriented; to be traditional is to be staunchly future-oriented, since the business of life is not only the pursuit of our telos but the transmission of everything valuable and precious to the next generation. \
\
### Human nature as practical reasonors\
\
*Dependent Rational Animals* is, in part, a response to the lingering worries about relativism that plague MacIntyre's theory. His answer to this worry is, I believe, the crux of his whole theory of ethics. It appeals to two concepts that are, for him, intimately bound up with each other. The two concepts are practical reason and human nature. Rational animals is *what we are*. If we cannot escape our identity as animals who are (potentially) practically rational, then we cannot escape our need for certain virtues. Furthermore, some activities will militate against our growing up to become fully practical rationality; these are vices. \
\
This connection highlights what an important truth that Weinstein observes: the primary theme of MacIntyre's work has not been goodness or virtue but practical rationality itself.[@weinstein2003macintyre 60] MacIntyre defends the assumption that morality is not a special domain of practical life but the whole domain of *living well*. *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* and *Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry* take up themes about rationality per se, while *After Virtue* and *Dependent Rational Animals* follow the Aristotelian pattern of treating ethics as a species of practical rationality. \
\
The project of *Dependent Rational Animals* is to insist that (a) human beings are animals even if we are animals of a particular and unusual sort; and that (b) our dependence and vulnerability are as morally significant as our independence, autonomy, or self-sufficiency. In other words, there are virtues of both autonomy *and* dependence. The book also contends that (c) certain social arrangements are conducive to the transmission and sustenance of both kinds of virtue.  \
\
Let\'92s consider a key quotation on each of these themes. Regarding (a) the notion that we are unusual animals, MacIntyre argues at length that the human differentia (be it language, reason, practical reason, self-consciousness, or what have you) does not eradicate the commonalities between us and other animals. He says: \
\
>I shall contend that although our differences from all other species are certainly of crucial importance, it is also important that both initially in our earliest childhood activities and to some extent thereafter we comport ourselves towards the world in much the same way as other intelligent animals. Indeed our ability to transcend those limitations depends in part upon certain of those animal characteristics among them the nature of our identity.[@macintyre1999dependent 8] \
\
The point, I take it, is that we are practical reasoners. Imagine any scenario of humans gathering and doing what comes naturally, and it will involve group deliberation about what to do: High school students debating about where to sit at lunch; couples arguing over the budget; political leaders proposing new laws; philosophy department meetings making hiring and admissions decisions. The pattern is this: groups of humans engaging in practical reason \'97 a community thinking what to do. It is impossible (for fully functioning adults) to live life even for a full day without engaging in such reasoning. \
\
A second point is that human life is not one continuous phase of adulthood; it begins with youth and ends with old age. Regarding point (b), he argues that vulnerability, dependence, affliction characteristic especially of early childhood and old age, but also of any sickness, injury, or misfortune are highly morally significant.  As he says:  \
\
>Virtues of independent rational agency need for their adequate exercise to be accompanied by what I shall call the virtues of acknowledge dependence and that a failure to understand this is apt to secure some features of rational agency. Moreover both sets of virtues are needed in order to actualize the distinctive potentialities that are specific to the human rational animal. Identifying how and why they are needed is a prerequisite for understanding their central place in the kind of human life through which human flourishing can be achieved.[@macintyre1999dependent 8] \
\
Finally, regarding (c), MacIntyre argues that \'93neither the modern state nor the modern family can supply that kind of political and social association that is needed.\'94[@macintyre1999dependent 9] Not only individual human beings, but entire communities, institutions, and nations need virtues to keep their integrity and to produce the next generation of independent, virtuous, rational animals.\
\
// Transition\
\
How do the arguments of *After Virtue* connect to these points? We may fairly draw this connection: since human beings are animals, social animals, and social practically-reasoning animals, our account of ends and the virtues that enable them must be sensitive to all three of these points. \
\
Whatever definition of virtue we settle on will generate a \'93list\'94 of virtues. Whatever virtues are included on the list had better not exclude virtues that make human life possible; it had better not exclude (as Aristotle did) women and manual workers from the very possibility of developing virtues. \
\
We can see how the structural limits on what it means to be human begin to set boundaries on our ethical theories. Empirical study cannot tell us what is good, but it can set limits on *what is not* going to be good for creatures like us. Biologically, we are animals evolved from simpler animals.[@macintyre1999dependent x] But our practical reasoning sets us apart in some respects. We have the burden and responsibility to set the course for our own lives, and to care for the dependent among us who are not yet practical reasoners or who are no longer such. \
\
The practice of practical reasoning is a common human practice. This makes sense of why educational institutions (as one example) are so important. Without them, virtues \'97 and the goods open to the virtuous \'97 are liable to remain unavailable to many. Vices harm the dependent and restrict them from becoming independent practical reasoners. \
\
// This also illuminates why the differences between humans and lower animals is less important than MacIntyre initially assumed. Animals cannot practically reason in quite as sophisticated ways as we can. \
\
### Tradition-constituted rationality ###\
\
Practical rationality, while it is "human", only takes place within human contexts -- traditions. As MacIntyre says, "We, whoever we are, can only begin enquiry from the vantage point afforded by our relationship to some specific social and intellectual past through which we have affiliated ourselves to some particular tradition of enquiry, extending the history of that enquiry into the present ...\'94[@macintyre1988whose 401] The tradition of enquiry we inhabit gives us not only abstract standards of reasoning but also facts, connections, concepts, and the very language we speak. Rationality, for MacIntyre, is inclusive of all the resources by which we judge true and false. Rationality itself as tradition-constituted and tradition-constituting. The resources I receive from my tradition are resources I may prune, discard, modify, or add to. \
\
The means we have of "switching" traditions are first, to identify the inadequacies of our primary tradition; and secondly, to explore via philosophical imagination the resources of a rival tradition. We must empathetically engage with our rivals as if we are learning a "second first language." He says: \
\
>For each of us, therefore, the question now is: To what issues does that particular history bring us in contemporary debate? What resources does our particular tradition afford in this situation? Can we by means of those resources understand the achievements and successes, and the failures and sterilities, of rival traditions more adequately than their own adherents can? More adequately by our own standards? More adequately also by theirs? It is insofar as the histories narrated in this book lead on to answers to these questions that they also hold promise of answering the questions: Whose justice? Which rationality?\'94[@macintyre1988whose 402]\
\
By presenting rationality and tradition as almost the same concept, MacIntyre both elevates the concept of tradition and threatens the concept of rationality. Since traditions vary, is there any way to avoid the conclusion that rationalities vary -- and incommensurably so? \
\
### Practical wisdom ###\
\
To answer this, we need to consider *excellence* in practical reasoning. Our human nature as dependent practical reasoners clarifies why prudence or *phronesis* is the master virtue and also helps to shore up his virtue theory against the accusation that it is relativistic. *Phronesis* complements and completes every other moral virtue. MacIntyre defends Aristotle\'92s conception of the practical syllogism wherein the major premise is an evaluative judgment about a virtue or action-type; the minor premise is a truth judgment about a situation or action-token; the conclusion is *an action*. For example, \'93I ought to do (the courageous thing of) resisting a student\'92s attempt to bribe me for a higher grade. This student is attempting to bribe me for a higher grade. Therefore, in this case, I ought to do (the courageous thing of) resisting this student\'92s attempt to bribe me.\'94 Without moral virtues, prudence is simply the knowledge of *what is to be done*. Without prudence, the moral virtues are simply skills or habits that might be serviceable to bad ends; one might be excellent in achieving *what is not be done*. \
\
The mastery of prudence over other virtues also unifies the other virtues. *Dependent Rational Animals* advances MacIntyre\'92s virtue theory in that it supplies a basis for the unity of intellectual and moral virtues, for the unity of the various moral virtues, and for unity of the various stages of the narrative of *human* life. The paradoxical notion of \'93wicked virtues\'94 are explained only with this broad context of human life, and with this definition of human nature. \
\
Although these responses to the initial worry about relativism may bring up more questions than they answer, they at least present a coherent picture of human life and the qualities needed to live it well. \
\
### Section Conclusion\
\
While there is much more that could be said, let's call this adequate and consider some of the responses to MacIntyre's work. \
\
In short, MacIntyre thinks that "human beings need the virtues" because they are intrinsically good and useful for transforming communities and persons.[@macintyre1999dependent] At the practical level of daily life, a small community (such as a family or town or university) does well to organize themselves around a common vision of what is good and a common conception of what qualities will help everyone to attain that good. At the theoretical level of philosophical ethics, the concepts of virtue, practical wisdom, and happiness supply for moral theory what many modern moralities have not: a clear, coherent, useful, and justifiable theory that grounds a rational pursuit of the good life and resolvable moral disagreements. \
\
For MacIntyre, moral enquiry is a practice that takes place within a tradition, a community. It can and should be undertaken by regular folk, not just specialists in philosophy. And the goal of such enquiry is discovering what is really admirable and pursuing it, becoming more admirable moral agents through the acquisition of virtues. Virtues are acquired traits that enable the achievement of goods internal to the practices, those traits that sustain traditions, and those traits by which we overcome perennial temptations to lead lives that are divided, deviant, or contrary to our true nature. \
\
## Objections \
\
MacIntyre\'92s work has been influential. Yet he has opponents on all sides. He is a traditionalist and so has come in for criticism from his fellow Aristotelians or Thomists such as Robert P. George and John Haldane on the fine points of the tradition. I shall not dig deeply into these worries; it seems to me a higher priority to persuade more philosophers of the main points of the tradition.  A second group are MacIntyre's \'93genealogists.\'94 Some are postmodernists or continental philosophers. Such readers tend to agree with MacIntyre's critique of modernity but reject his rather optimistic alternative. They agree that our choice is between \'93Nietzsche or Aristotle\'94 -- but they reject Aristotle.[@hill1992macintyre; @korkut2012macintyre] This chapter is not the place to host a debate between the Nietszchean school and the Aristotelian school. Yet it seems a bit cheap to stipulate that Nietzscheanism is false and move on. Perhaps Nietzscheanism is true. Perhaps all moral discourse that appeals to rationality, divine law, human nature, tradition or any other such nonsense is simply a mask for the Will to Power. Philippa Foot, at least, has argued that analytic philosophers do not take Nietzsche's immoralist challenge seriously enough.[@foot2001natural chapter 7] Suffice it to say that I have not yet been persuaded by the "masters of suspicion." The third group of critics belong to the tradition of modernity. These mostly analytic modern philosophers are MacIntyre's \'93encyclopedists.\'94 Such readers (including Martha Nussbaum and Thomas Nagel) find MacIntyre\'92s diagnosis misguided and so find his solutions needless and radical. They deny that our choice is between *either* \'93Nietzsche *or* Aristotle." They rather defend some one or other modern moral philosophy, such as deontology, consequentialism, contractarianism, egoism, sentimentalism, or something else. This third group is my primary audience. It will be impossible here to mention let alone do justice to MacIntyre's sizable crowd of interlocutors. Instead, in the following sub-sections, I shall articulate three families of objections about relativism, tradition-constituted rationality, and teleology that seem to me to make the most trouble for MacIntyre's account of virtue. \
\
### Relativism objections\
\
The most recurring objection is that MacIntyre's virtue theory is viciously relativistic. This weighty objection deserves almost a whole chapter in its own right.  Generally, how do we make sense of these worries? The constellation of (sometimes conflicting) positions that fly under heading of 'relativism' is no small task. Richard Rorty gives one representative expression: relativism is the claim that "there is nothing to be said about either truth or rationality apart from descriptions of the familiar procedures of justification which a given society\'97ours\'97uses in one or another area of inquiry."[@rorty1991objectivity] \
\
Instead of attempting to sift through the enormous literature on relativism, I shall here follow Stephn Lutz's stipulation: "'Relativism' is a thesis about the conclusion of enquiries; every would-be knower wants truth, but is limited by its contingent, historical conditions and/or the perspective of the enquirer. Hence no conclusion is *true* in the sense the enquirer wanted."[@lutz2004tradition 66] In other words, to the relativist, the knower's (individual or cultural) perspective is both starting point and the ending point of any enquiry. \
\
Now, it is undeniable that in MacIntyre's account virtue is relative to rival traditions of moral inquiry with their conflicting communities and practices. So has he only provided a cultural anthropology of virtue and not a theory of virtue? Is there any way to rationally adjudicate moral conflict? \
\
There are a variety of ways to specify this worry. For example, Stephen Lutz summarizes nine objections that might fall under the heading of the \'93relativism objection.\'94[@lutz2004tradition 74ff.] Thankfully, not all of these demand equal attention: some are simply misunderstandings, while others are legitimate calls for clarification. I shall quickly summarize how Lutz answers these misunderstandings and clarifications. The other objections that put real pressure on the limits of MacIntyre\'92s theory I shall address in the next section. \
\
### Five misguided criticisms ###\
\
The first criticism is that of Susan Feldman.[@feldman1986objectivity] Feldman misinterprets MacIntyre\'92s project as a failed and incoherent attempt to resolve factious, subjective ethical disputes by judging them from an abstract, objective, ideal observer. But MacIntyre never explicitly presents his theory as an ideal observer theory; rather, he explicitly denies it. The ideal observer would have to *begin* the enquiry from the view from nowhere, which is impossible for us. MacIntyre just is not building -- not even *attempting* to build -- a procedural meta-ethics with which to adjudicate otherwise intractable normative disagreements. \
\
The second is from Robet Wachbroit. MacIntyre himself responded to Wachbroit in the second edition of *After Virtue*.[@wachbroit1984relativism] Wachbroit's worry is about the fundamental plurality of rationalities. He thinks MacIntyre faces a dilemma. Either MacIntyre himself writes from the view from nowhere, the Enlightenment objectivity, the archimedean point, or he writes from within the Aristotelian tradition. MacIntyre seems to get caught in this dilemma in sentences like these: "It scarcely needs repeating that it is the central thesis of *After Virtue* that the Aristotelian moral tradition is the best example we possess of a tradition whose adherents are entitled to a high measure of confidence in its epistemological and moral resources."[@macintyre1984after 277] To whom does that 'we' refer? The dilemma, again, is that either 'we' are the Enlightened modern liberals or 'we' are the dyed-in-the-wool Aristotelians. On the first horn, if he writes from the view-from-nowhere, then MacIntyre is simply a modern meta-ethicist writing modern meta-ethics. He is criticizing liberalism from within the liberal tradition; he is borrowing the resources of the liberal definition of rationality to posit a theory in which no one definition of rationality has the resources to write books like *After Virtue*. On the second horn, if 'we' are card-carrying Aristotelians, it is trivial and almost tautologous to assert that 'we' take a high measure of confidence in Aristotelianism's epistemological and moral resources. Of course 'we' do! That kind of heady confidence that 'we' are up to standards arises within *each* tradition according to *that* tradition's own standards. \
\
But Wachbroit misunderstands MacIntyre's theory ever so slightly here. MacIntyre can run through the horns of the dilemma. The 'we' need not be an ideal observer from a God's-eye point of view nor an Aristotelian already subsumed in the Aristotelian tradition. The 'we' can be those of us within broader western culture who have faced or might face the same kind of epistemological crisis that lead MacIntyre (and others) to critically evaluate the present state of western culture. The adherent of liberalism and the adherent of Aristotelianism share a common social, historical, and traditional root. Without too much difficulty, they can learn each other's conceptual vocabulary as a 'second language'. By self-reflecting upon the Enlightenment "branch" of the broader western tradition, and by facing up to its inadequacies and epistemological inconsistencies, the liberal adherent can test for him or herself whether the Aristotelian tradition has more resources for solving problems that are problems *by liberalism's own lights*. If, as MacIntyre did, such a person discovers that the Aristotelian has more resources for solving those problems, he or she might make rejoin with that older but no less thriving tradition. \
\
The third criticism is this: Mark Colby misunderstands MacIntyre's project as an attempt to develop a new, objective criterion of truth that will solve the problem of epistemological crisis, regardless of one's tradition. On Colby's reading, MacIntyre is a kind of pragmatist, where the truth is just the conclusion of a certain sort of rational enquiry. But MacIntyre denies this. The test of a traditon's rationality is its adequation to reality. Lutz illustrates this with the example of astronomy. \
\
> Ptolemaic astronomy lasted 1000 years because it solves a set of astronomical problems better than any of its opponents, including the heliocentric models of Aristarchus and Copernicus. Nevertheless, it did not adequately characterize the true nature of planetary motion and so under close evaluation it was plagued by inefficiencies that lead its adherents into a epistemological crisis. The theory that overcame Ptolemaic astronomy did so because it solved the astronomical problems or adequately than the Ptolemaic model, and it was confirmed by its predictive capacity. The fact that Kepler's astronomical model once subsumed into Newtonian physics, could predict novel facts provided confirmation that it was not only a clever description of a puzzling phenomenon, but a more adequate characterization of its object: the true nature of planetary motion.\
> what counts as progressiveness in the epistemological crisis resolution is improved adequacy to truths, but it pissed him logical crises only rise *within* traditions. Ptolemaic astronomers overcame *their* epistemological crisis when they abandoned *their own* geocentric beliefs Intertraditional considerations arise only when the adherents of one tradition are able to recongize in the resources of another tradition a more adequate solution to their own epistemological crisis. So progressiveness in epistemological crisis resolution cannot function as an intertraditional norm of rationality. This is no challenge to MacIntyre, however, because MacIntyre does not envision epistemological crisis as a tool for comparative ethics or meta-ethics.[@lutz2004tradition 91]\
\
As I understand Lutz' point here, Colby is conflating the attempt of an enquirer *within* a tradition to resolve his or her epistemological crisis through examining the resources of a rival tradition with the attempt of an inquirier *outside* both traditions to resolve "epistemological crisis" per se by developing an intertraditional or trans-traditional criterion of adequacy. MacIntyre thinks the former is possible (and happens often) but that the latter is impossible. \
\
Alicia Juarrero Roque surfaces a fourth possible misinterpretation. MacIntyre claims that "comparison" between traditions is possible for an enquirer. But it is not possible by the attainment of an objective, context-free stance. Rather, each inquirier acquires a conceptual framework from his own tradition -- this is like a "first language." But each enquirer has the capacity to learn a "second first language". We can learn another conceptual framework philosophical imagination, through taking it *as if true* even before affirming it *as true*. Why do this? Usually because the enquirer's own tradition has failed him; he sees its inadequacies, he sees its problems and contradictions, he sees that it fails to live up to its own standards. MacIntyre describes what "rare gift of empathy"[@macintyre1988whose 167] that this "philosophical imagination" makes possible: \'93\'85understand the theses, arguments, and concepts of their rival in such a way that they are able to view themselves from such an alien standpoint and to re-characterize their own beliefs in an appropriate manner from the alien perspective."[@macintyre1988whose 167] Roque's worry is that the capacity for learning a second first language is an innate, rational capacity that *all people share.* If so, then belief in such a capacity contradicts the definition of tradition-constituted rationality. If not, then the absence of such a capacity renders tradition comparison impossible. MacIntyre's response is flatly to deny this interpretation of his work. The "capacity" to learn another tradition as a "second first language" is a "rare gift of empathy" and in no way part of a supposed bundle of innate capacities. This rebuttal does not make such a capacity unproblematic; we still might wonder whether, for an given enquirer, that enquirer's estimation that he possesses the gift of empathy and philosophical imagination isn't just a re-statement of the trivial thought, "I think I am right."\
\
These four criticisms arise from a worry about relativism but the worry is ultimately unjustified. Below, I shall respond more fully to a few more versions of this worry.\
\
### Tradition-constituted rationality objections ###\
\
The second and related objection is that his theory of tradition-constituted rationality is incoherent, unhelpfully vague, or perhaps incompatible with the very act of writing a book like *After Virtue*. The worries about relativism can be answered by an appeal to practical rationality. But for MacIntyre, practical rationality is tradition-consituted. So at least some worries about relativism reappear at this second order. For this reason, Stephen Lutz's last "relativism" objection I treat as a \'93tradition-constituted rationality" objection.\
\
The objection is threefold: is MacIntyre\'92s concept of tradition-constituted rationality even coherent? Suppose some traditions are truly incommensurable to each other, and that MacIntyre himself is truly situated within a tradition. It follows it is not possible to write a book (like *After Virtue*?) from a universal, objective, view-from-nowhere. But MacIntyre wrote such books and defending such theories. This amounts to a performative contradiction. \
\
Even if his concept is coherent,  is it *clear* enough to be an indispensable feature of an ethical theory? What constitutes a tradition? MacIntyre's examples sometimes lead us to believe that a tradition can be anything from a religion (Judaism) to a discipline (like moral inquiry) to a philosophical school (like Thomism). \
\
Once the concept of tradition is clarified, how can MacIntyre avoid the charge of relativism at this level? According to MacIntyre's account, members of traditions can leave their primary tradition after undergoing an epistemological crisis. Remember that varying traditions can disagree about a proposition P. Perhaps tradition A finds P true and B finds it false, on best evidence and sufficient reflection. But incommensurable traditions disagree about the standards (say, S1 and S2) by which to judge the truth and even the rationality of other traditions. So A finds P true and rational (by S1) while B finds P false and irrational (by S2). They genuinely disagree. And A judges B to be irrational (since they deny that P) while B returns the favor (since A affirms that P). \
\
Let's put these abstractions into an example. Consider Annabelle. Annabelle is member of tradition A. Suppose that by A's standards of rationality, S1 contradictory propositions cannot both be true in the same sense. And suppose that A teaches that P. Finally, suppose that P entails both (Q and ~Q). Annabelle discovers a problem with her tradition. She cannot deny P nor can she affirm the contradiction. After some searching about, she concludes she cannot solve the problem and cannot even discover the rational resources with which to solve them. Being passingly familiar with tradition B, she becomes curious why her friends who belong to that tradition deny P and exercises her philosophical imagination to begin to see B "from within." Tradition B is compelling, since it denies that P. She "converts" traditions. However, there is a problem with tradition B, and that is that the standard of rationality of B (S2) allows its adherents to affirm a contradiction. So now, even though Annabelle left A to avoid having to affirm a contradiction (by her standard of rationality S1) now that she has joined B she no longer sees it as irrational to affirm the contradiction (by her new standard of rationality S2). This is surely an odd conclusion. \
\
A second variation on the same problem is this: how would a born-and-raised member of tradition B, affirming S2, ever come to epistemological crisis? Discontentment with contradictions is not available to B members *ex hypothesi*. They do not see affirming a contradiction as irrational. Their tradition can bear a hundred instances of (Q and ~Q).\
\
The odd conclusion of this thought experiment is a dilemma: either such nonsense is possible, or embracing the law of non-contradiction is a universal standard of rationality in every tradition. The latter option seems to indicate that traditions A and B are *not* actually incommensurable, since they share one rather substantial presupposition. The flow of members from one to the other is intelligible. The former option allows A and B to be incommensurable, but seems to freeze members in their own tradition. Members of A would have no (rational) justification for joining B, while members of B would have no (rational) justification for leaving B. So either all traditions are the same (in which case MacIntyre's definition is unclear) or some people are in principle locked in their own tradition (in which case one kind of relativism is final). \
\
While "tradition" and "tradition-constituted rationality" were supposed to solve the conundrums MacIntyre faced in his life and philosophical career, the cure may have been worse than the disease. \
\
### *Telos* objections###\
\
The third and final major objection I shall consider pertains to teleology. This constellation of objections is powerful. Yet in addition to the real philosophical difficulty of the matter, the prejudices and misconceptions surrounding teleology are so thick I shall need more than the sections in this chapter to fully respond to it. I think an adequate response can, ultimately, be made. It will take some philosophical digging around in the structural foundations of our thinking to make progress.  \
\
In this section I shall present three objections from teleology that are especially problematic for MacIntyre's narrative. \
\
The first is to deny MacIntyre's narrative. MacIntyre has it that modern moral philosophy surgically excised *telos* from natural science, psychology, and ethics. But perhaps modern moral philosophy is not so anti-teleological as all that. Kant's categorical imperative, much vaunted for its austere duty for the sake of duty, is actually aimed at perfection.[@ward1971kant] Keith Ward argued with some impatience almost 40 years ago (10 years before *After Virtue*'s first edition) that Kant should not be interpreted as commending duty as some abstract, context-free obligation. He says: \
\
>Kant's position is not merely that one must conceive oneself as setting up a purposive order of Nature, according to universal laws, as though one could arbitrarily choose anything whatsoever as one's purpose. One can see this if one takes Kant's list of examples of moral duties in the *Metaphysic of Morals* [sic]. Masturbation is against the *purposes of Nature*, in forming the sexual organs; suicide contravenes *Nature's purpose* in establishing self-love in order to preserve life... Finally, "holiness of will" must be pursued, as this expresses the absolute worth of the human person, in its freedom from sensuous impulses and its transcendence of Nature.[@ward1971kant 341] \
\
Likewise, it seems that consequentialism is teleological in a plausible sense of *telos*. For consequences are *ends* of actions. I go to work *in order to* earn a paycheck at the end of the month; the consequence (my paycheck) is the goal or purpose or point of the action (going to work). So perhaps virtue ethics can be synthesized with consequentialism. \
\
Furthermore, Cummiskey has argued that Kant can be understood as a consequentialist of sorts.[@cummiskey1996kantian] The proposal is that Kant's *justification* for moral normative principles was a brute, formal, categorical imperative, but the *content* of such normative principles included agents and the goods they aim to attain. Happiness can be valued as an imperfect duty, though rational agency must be valued as a perfect duty. Without entering into all the interesting details at this juncture, the thought is that perhaps a (thoroughly modern) moral philosophy like deontology can be synthesized with natural teleology. \
\
A second form of this objection about teleology is that ethics can get along well enough without intrinsic *teloi*. We cannot accept natural teleology since this notion has been exorcised from natural science (and from all rational philosophy) by Darwin and Newton. Thankfully, morality can function without it. The moral law *by itself* guides or forms our actions without a natural *telos* performing that function. For example, Christine Korsgaard's "Authority of Reflection"[@korsgaard1996authority] builds a case that human autonomy -- the ability to be a law to oneself -- is the source of normative authority. How does this work? My own identity as a human being obligates me to behave morally. She argues that "autonomy is the source of obligation" and that "we have *moral* obligations... to humanity as such."[@korsgaard1996authority 93] Because I am self-reflective, I am accountable for what I do. Also because I am self-reflective, I have a self-conception. She says the "thinking self" regulates the "acting self." Korsgaard's notion of practical identity is that we assume identities such as human being, child, parent, teacher, etc. Each identity is functional; it grounds obligations. If I am really to be a teacher, I must show up for class. If I really am to be a parent, I must feed and educate my child. Practical identities may be more or less contingent. All of us are children; not all of us educators. At least one practical identity is necessary. That is our practical identity *as humans*. Humans "need to have practical conceptions of our identity in order to act and live."[@korsgaard1996authority 106] The fact is, we do act and live. Therefore we do have a moral identity. Put another way, she says: \'93Rational action is possible only if human beings find their own humanity to be valuable.\'94[@korsgaard1996authority 106] The moral identity is one in which I take up a viewpoint as a member of the "Kingdom of Ends", the community of those who also have a moral identity. So the moral law delivers content-full moral duties derived from my own autonomously legislated rules prescribed by my valuing humanity; these rules are not teleological in that they require any future fulfillment of an end to validate them. \
\
The point of these objections is to push back on MacIntyre's narrative in which our modern liberal tradition excised *telos*. Either we did not do so, or (even if we did) we could get along without it. \
\
These three objections -- about relativism, tradition-constituted rationality, and teleology -- are some of the most telling against MacIntyre's theory. In the discussion section I shall attempt to answer each one. \
\
## Discussion\
\
Jonathan Swift was rightly comforted at being considered a giant in Lilliput but a midget in Brobdingnag;[@swift1965gulliver Part I, chapter 2 and Part II, chapter 1] the compresence of opposite insults is a good indicator that he was a perfectly sensible size. Likewise, MacIntyre should be comforted that he is criticised for excessive rationalism by his co-religionists[@milbank2008theology] and for excessive religiosity by rationalists[@nussbaum1989recoiling]; he too progressive for traditionalists and too traditional for progressives; he is called far too liberal by conservatives and far too conservative by liberals. To quote Swift: "Philosophers are in the right when they tell us, that nothing is great or little otherwise than by Comparison." \
\
### Reply to relativism 1 -- relative rationality, absolute truth\
\
MacIntyre's denial of relativism boils down to two points: the first is that even situated enquiry can achieve truth. He accepts -- indeed, argues for -- a certain truth within relativism. That truth is that every enquirer seeks the conclusion of the enquiry at a particular time and place, within a particular social setting, within a language, and within a tradition. Following Lutz, we can say that MacIntyre accepts \'93relativity\'94. Relativity (a term borrowed from Michael Krausz[@krausz1984relativism]) is a thesis about *the condition of enquiry.* It is not a thesis about the *conclusion of enquiry.* Lutz approves of Mark Colby's statement that "argumentative situatedness is inescapable."[@lutz2004tradition 89] However such relative situatedness is compatible with objective or absolute or mind-independent or tradition-independent *truth*. \
\
Returning to Rorty's claim, we can say that MacIntyre agrees that "nothing can be said about... rationality" except what is taken as rational in a given society and tradition; where he disagrees is in equating rationality with *truth.* From the historically- and socially-situated position of enquiry, a philosopher (he argues) may indeed find truth. It is impossible to achieve objective or absolute or tradition-independent *rationality* but it is possible -- indeed, it is the hope and *telos* of enquiry -- to achieve objective *truth.* This may seem a paradox. \
\
The primary kind of truth we seek in enquiry is "the adequation of the mind to reality."[@aquinas Q.16 and *De Veritate* Q.1, A.1-3. "Veritas est adaequatio rei et intellectus."] This is the understanding of truth inherent in the Aristotelian tradition.[^3]  Aristotle says, \'93To say of what is that it is not, or of what is not that it is, is false, while to say of what is that it is, and of what is not that it is not, is true."[@aristotle *Metaphysics* 1011b25]  Aquinas calls this the adequation of the intellect to the object.\
\
[^3]: On the correspondance theory of truth, Marian David says: "The main positive argument given by advocates of the correspondence theory of truth is its obviousness. Descartes: 'I have never had any doubts about truth, because it seems a notion so transcendentally clear that nobody can be ignorant of it...the word "truth", in the strict sense, denotes the conformity of thought with its object' (1639, AT II 597). Even philosophers whose overall views may well lead one to expect otherwise tend to agree. Kant: 'The nominal definition of truth, that it is the agreement of [a cognition] with its object, is assumed as granted' (1787, B82). William James: 'Truth, as any dictionary will tell you, is a property of certain of our ideas. It means their "agreement", as falsity means their disagreement, with "reality"'' (1907, p. 96). Indeed, The Oxford English Dictionary tells us: "Truth, n. Conformity with fact; agreement with reality'".\
\
However, 'truth' is ambiguous across at least two senses: a metaphysical, substantive sense and an epistemological, logical sense. (There may be a third semantic sense.) The metaphysical sense of truth is simply reality. "Truth" is being itself. The logical sense of truth (which MacIntyre alludes to here) is the adequation of the intellect to those beings. Logical "truth" is knowing the (metaphysical) truth. The third semantic sense of 'truth' would, naturally, be the accurate relation between the content of one's assertions and the beings about which one is making assertions. "Truth" is veridical statements about the (metaphysical) truth.\
\
If we understand MacIntyre to be arguing or assuming that (logical) truth is adequation of mind to reality, we can make sense of his endorsement of "relativity". Rationality is something more pragmatic than truth, something more like "warranted assertability."[@dewey1941propositions 169] That is, the theories we rationally construct are, for us, the "best theory so far".[@macintyre1988whose] It is no contradiction or paradox to assert that our rationality is the best thus far but that others in the future (or the past, or in rival traditions) might be *closer* to the truth. \
\
The second point is that enquirers from within various traditions can (and often do) come to realize that their tradition is incoherent by its own standards and from this epistemological crisis come to find the resources of a rival tradition superior to their own; Aristotelian (and specifically Thomist) moral enquiry is, he argues, more rationally justified than encyclopedic or genealogical enquiry *by their standards* and *by its own standards*.  \
\
In this way, MacIntyre escapes (one iteration) of the charge of relativism. The truth can be known from within the confines of our tradition and perspective. This answer, of course, puts pressure on his definition of "tradition." We shall return to this concern below. \
\
### Reply to relativism 2 - unity of virtue ###\
\
Are there evil practices? If so, it seemed that MacIntyre's theory would allow "virtues" to serve wicked ends. The rebuttal to this charge depends on the unity of virtue. \
\
In *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?*, MacIntyre explicitly retracts his earlier belief that virtues exist without a unity under prudence.[@macintyre1988whose preface, p. x] The consequences of this retraction, Lutz argues, are crucial to refuting the charge of relativism. If virtues are unified, then even though virtues exist only in the context of practices, "no genuine practice can be inherently evil."[@lutz2004tradition 102] Rather, practical reason can judge *apparent goods* as genuine goods. The qualities needed for achieving the spurious goods internal to that "practice" would not be virtues but only *apparent virtues*. Now, such a definition certainly seems ad hoc. But Lutz provides a persuasive illustration: eugenics. Eugenics certainly seems to bear the markings of a genuine practice. Its apparent good is the purification of the gene pool for future generations. However, genuine virtues militate *against* the achievement of that goal. For example, Lutz cites a story of a doctor who had the virtue of compassion found himself unable to pursue the program of euthanizing mentally-disabled children.[@poliakov1979harvest 186-7] We might also recall Huck Finn's internal struggle with his "conscience" in Twain's *Adventures of Huckleberry Finn*. Huck decides to turn Jim in to the slave owners. He writes a letter outing Jim, and feels much better after "repenting" of his theft. But after vividly confronting Jim's humanity, his goodness, and their loyal friendship, he wavers. \
\
>I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I had ever felt so in my life, and I knowed I could pray now... it was a difficult situation. I picked up the letter, and held it in my hand. I was trembling, because I knew had to make a choice between two things, and the outcome of my decision would last forever. I thought about it a minute while I held my breath. And then I said to myself: \'93All right, then, I\'92ll GO to hell"\'97and tore it up. It was awful thoughts and awful words, but they was said... I shoved the whole thing out of my head, and said I would take up wickedness again, which was in my line, being brung up to it, and the other warn\'92t.[@twain2014adventures,Chapter 31] \
\
The humor of this passage arises, in large part, because of the tension between the *apparent good* of treating Jim as legal property and the *actual good* of treating Jim as an end in himself, as a free man just like any other. Huck's virtue (in this case, loyalty or friendship) *cannot* be put to use in the service of a corrupting practice like slave-trading. Just as vice subverts institutions and their worthy practices, virtue "subverts" vicious institutions and unworthy practices. Virtue marks the difference between the coward who disobeys his commanding officer's orders because the obedience would put him at risk of painful death and the courageous person who disobeys his commanding officer's order because obedience would require wrongdoing. Without prudence to discriminate between the two cases, we lack any resources by which to discriminate courage and cowardice, between a virtuous resistance and vicious resistance. \
\
Some might worry that the distinction between apparent goods and actual goods brings with it more problems than it solves. It is certainly a distinction that leaves many questions unanswered. My first reply is that such a distinction is inevitable and necessary in our practical reasoning. Assume for a reductio that "there is no real distinction between apparent and real goods." Then either *nothing* is "actually good" (everything that appears good is just an apparent good) or that *nothing* is "actually bad though it appears good" (everything that appears good is a real good). But I take it as axiomatic and irrefutable that some things are actually good (life, pleasure, happiness, art, stars.) And some things that appear good are not good: obeying unjust laws, eating unhealthy but delicious food, etc.  Therefore there is a real distinction between apparent and real goods. \
\
A second reply, however, is that the admitted indeterminacy of MacIntyre's account reflects the real indeterminacy of our moral lives. Consider two phenomena: some individuals and cultures persist in behaviors (that I believe) are wicked and unjustifiable -- slavery, child prostitution, ritual human sacrifice, or what have you. It needs to be explained, from within my tradition, how it could be that otherwise decent and normal human beings could persist in such vileness. The other phenomena is this: some individuals and cultures repent and change (what I believe are) their wicked ways. In other words, there is no magical linear moral progression from wicked to good, in history as a whole; yet, even so, some individuals cultures become more good (by my standards of goodness). How do we explain this paradoxical phenomenon? \
\
MacIntyre's account explains why vices sometimes persist within pseudo-practices, institutions, and traditions from generation to generation; on the other hand, it explains why practice-enabling virtues sometimes emerge to disrupt a pseudo-practice, a wicked institution, and a corrupt or at least incomplete tradition. The fact is that "many kinds of activities can be, and in fact are considered to be, practices. Some of these may conflict radically, owing to errors and insufficiences in rationlity."[@lutz2004tradition 103] Errors in rationality explain errors in traditions and hence misacriptions of the title 'virtue.' Rationality answers to truth, to the world as it is, not merely to the pragmatic  truth to "dialectical success."[@lutz2004tradition 104] Hence, virtues answer to *what is really good*. They do not merely answer to "what-counts-as-good-for-us", which property is relative to each tradition. \
\
In this way, MacIntyre escapes this iteration of the charge of relativism, while still explaining why rival traditions differ -- and sometimes radically differ -- in their evaluations and opinions. Incomplete traditions can, and do, undergo crisis. Particular persons within that tradition discover and perseverate on inadequacies within the tradition, leading to an epistemological crisis. In response, others within the same tradition may become willing to examine the resources of rival traditions and either quit their primary tradition or re-fashion it, re-make it, update it, and make real moral and intellectual progress. \
\
### Closing remarks on relativism\
\
\
MacIntyre has responded to (and he thinks refuted) the charge of relativism multiple times, in his primary works and in \'93responses to critics.\'94 Yet for many, relativism stains the image of MacIntyre. J. L. A. Garcia says this: \
\
>MacIntyre\'92s rebuttal is as radical as it is ingenious. It is, in effect, to outrelativize the relativist. Rather than recoiling from relativism, as I understand his strategy, MacIntyre plunges so deeply into it, as we might say, to fall out the other side\'85 Contrary to what he sees as the relativist\'92s hasty and facile assumption, MacIntyre insists that it is not necessarily (nor always) the case that everyone is so situated that there is no position whose adoption *by her* at *any* time would be rationally superiors to some particular *set* of alternatives\'85Now the tables are turned, and it is the relativist who appears the dogmatist, claiming to know in advance and *a priori* that no one can be so situated.[@garcia2003]\
\
 This all appears to me correct. MacIntyre uses the genealogist\'92s starting points to undercut the encyclopedist \'97 a move which implicitly approves of moral relativism. But he doesn\'92t stop there; he uses all the resources of intellectual history and contemporary natural and social sciences to defend some (but not all) of the beliefs and values of modernity, such as the value of democracy, the value of university education, the value of history, the belief in the possibility of scientific truth, the belief in progress \'97 a move which seems to endorse the Enlightenment and the liberal tradition as against the genealogists. To both, his challenge is to use the best resources of the past and the best rational resources of the present to defend a particular set of conclusions *as the best thus far*, as the *closest* to the truth. To both, his challenge is to defend a conception of morality and rationality *neither* claiming that any such conceptions are impossible *nor* claiming to have *concluded* the enquiry once and for all.\
\
Even after clarifying the obscure points of the dialectic MacIntyre does endorse, the objection can be resolved but not finally refuted. I would like to offer a suggestion below as to why this is so. \
\
### Tradition-constituted rationality reply 1 - incoherence? ###\
\
MacIntyre would have us believe that 'rationality' is not a disembodied set of timeless and universal procedures of thinking. My rationality includes whatever standards of reasoning I accept, and all the other resources (facts, authorities, memories) I use to judge true and false. \
\
From my perspective, and my tradition, every tradition affirms the law of non-contradiction. But that is just to say that if Walt Whitman or Nagarjuna denies the law (or reflectively affirms contradictory propositions) then I will necessarily judge them to be irrational.[@sepcontradiction. "Do I contradict myself? / Very well, then, I contradict myself. / (I am large, I contain multitudes.)  (Walt Whitman, \'93Song of Myself\'94); "Everything is real and not real.\
Both real and not real. / Neither real nor not real. / That is Lord Buddha's teaching." (M\uc0\u363 la-madhyamaka-k\u257 rik\u257  18:8), quoted in Garfield (1995: 102)] \
\
But I wish to go further and say that this strand of Buddhism *really is irrational*. That is, I wish to affirm that they are irrational -- full stop. I am not sure MacIntyre's theory allows me to affirm that. Unless I am missing something crucial here, this seems to me a limitation of the theory. \
\
Perhaps a qualified acceptance of MacIntyre's claim about tradition-constituted rationality is that when a tradition does not *seem* share this standard of rationality (the value of logical consistency) I should not be too quick to judge that I have really understood their meaning. Perhaps when I ask them if they affirm (S is P and S is not P) they have a slightly different concept in mind for "not" or for "and." Or perhaps they are speaking of an entity instantiating a property and not instantiating that same property at the same time but in ever so slightly different respects. Walt Whitman may be saying he contradicts himself in ever so slightly different respects in order to grasp apparently paradoxical truths that can be predicated of a transcendental modern man. Or perhaps they are denying both P and not P in favor of some other, different articulation of the predicates a given subject instantiates. In the case of any of these alternatives, the principle of charity recommends I extend my interlocutor the benefit of the doubt before concluding that the appearance of irrationality reflects real irrationality. \
\
### Tradition-constituted rationality reply 2 - clarity\
\
Even if MacIntyre's account is coherent, is it clear?  John Haldane (among others) questions MacIntyre\'92s ability coherently to identify what a tradition is. What is tradition A? How do we differentiate it from B? Are two traditions separate and hence identifiable only if they are *incommensurable*? How much difference constitutes separation? How much overlap is compatible with difference? Jewish and Christian traditions share a common origin and bear considerable overlap in authorities, scriptures, and doctrines. \
\
MacIntyre\'92s definition makes answering these questions difficult. He characterizes a tradition as \'93separate and unified when its members or texts have a core set of shared commitments to beliefs, when the tradition is situated in a particular context in a particular set of institutions and when the tradition has an identifiable linguistic difference when compared to other traditions.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 83] But is there any universal procedure for identifying such linguistic and institutional differences? \
\
The right response to this call for clarification, I think, comes from Weinstein. We should not expect, by MacIntyre\'92s lights, that there is an automatically objective, view-from-nowhere by which we can define tradition itself. Rather, MacIntyre concludes that \'93the concept of a tradition, together with the criteria for its use and application, is itself one developed from within one particular tradition-based standpoint. This does not preclude its application to the very tradition within which it was developed.\'94[@horton1994after 295] This is liable to frustrate some readers. But the alternative (by MacIntyre\'92s lights) is intellectual imperialism wherein one tradition has the *real* scoop on every other tradition. MacIntyre grants that his self-definition of his own tradition arises, in part, from his criteria of that tradition. Traditions change over time. They progress (according to their own unchanging standards) toward unchanging goals or else they abandon old standards. \
\
I think MacIntyre\'92s solution stands or falls with his theory of rationality and practical rationality, which is, of course, tradition-constituted. This may not satisfy critiques but it cordons off their objections. It pushes back, to demand that the critics self-reflect and specify their own tradition (in MacIntyre\'92s words) even as they demand a definition of the term \'91tradition\'92 (in their own words). \
\
### Tradition-constituted rationality 3 - can rationality justify morality? ###\
\
MacIntyre's theory of virtue makes morality depend on rationality. This has been a common, but contentious, belief in the Aristotelian tradition. I am indebted to @dandrea2006tradition for his illuminating explication and discussion of this objection. D'andrea points out that Philippa Foot (inter alia) levels a critique against MacIntyre: after all the informative and wide-ranging historical analysis, MacIntyre\'92s account does not solve the \'93problem posed by Plato, and never solved \'85 that of showing the rationality, for any man, of a thorough-going acceptance of the restraints of justice.\'94[@foot1981] This is the \'93problem of immoralism\'94 she tries to address in the final chapter of her *Natural Goodness*. \
\
The challenge of a Nietzsche or Callicles or Thrasymachus lies in their acceptance that the good life for humans *requires* some virtues or requires virtue in some sense but their rejection of the \'93robust concept of justice with its corresponding constraints on action.\'94[@dandrea2006tradition 430]\
\
One response is this: the question \'93why be moral?\'94 is never asked in the abstract. For example, in describing the "self of the heroic age" MacIntyre says, \'93In heroic society there is no 'outside' except that of the stranger. A man who tried to withdraw himself from his given position in heroic society would be engaged in the enterprise of trying to make himself disappear.\'94[@macintyre1984after 126] Even though virtues in twenty-first century North America are not what the same as Homer's day, there is a parallel to be drawn. \
\
Philosophers often ask \'93why be moral?\'94 hypothetically. They ask it *as if* speaking on the skeptic's behalf, or as if *they* were skeptics. But hypothetical moral skeptics will not do. We must consider a concrete character, real or fictional. Once we look for a real or fictional skeptic, a problem arises. By MacIntyre's lights, sincere \'93why be moral?\'94 skeptics are political or social outcasts. For millions of people who are full-fledged members of their tradition, the \'93why be moral?\'94 question will not usually arise. Parents, teachers, religious leaders, politicians, businesses, and non-profit organizations all have a hand in giving each member of the community the tradition out of which the community arises and within which abstract philosophical or pseudo-philosophical worries such as \'93What does it all mean?\'94 do not arise because they are satisfactorily answered.\
\
By contrast, the emergence of the doubt as to whether one should be moral, and the crystallization of the doubt into an articulate challenge, is *a political failure*. The *polis* to which the moral skeptic belongs has failed him. The moral skeptic, likewise, has failed the *polis* which belongs to him or her. So MacIntyre's theory makes room for people who are not actually skeptical (to whom an answer to Foot's challenge is not required) and people who are actually skeptical but do not belong to their society (to whom an answer to Foot's challenge would be meaningless).\
\
MacIntyre's theory makes room for one more gruop: moral skeptics *are* members of their own tradition but are seeing the problems within their own tradition and who are troubled by a \'93border tradition\'94. This type of skeptic sees the resources of a rival tradition and compares such favorably with the resources of his own tradition. The skeptic is, in a word, entering epistemological crisis. \
\
Specifically, it might be that the moral skeptic has been raised outside of the Aristotelian tradition and is noticing the inadequacies of his or her own tradition, and is entering epistemological crisis. MacIntyre's response is to invite him or her to do the hard work of resolving that crisis by examining, from within the context of a primary tradition *and* a \'93second first\'94 tradition, the problems at hand and the available solutions, working toward an ever greater understanding of the truth. \
\
In short, MacIntyre's theory gives an account of two contradictory phenomena. It explains how a moral skeptic might arise within a community and how that skeptic might be moved to a more adequate grasp of the truth; and it explains why, in healthy, unified, moral societies, *so few people become moral skeptics*.\
\
### *Telos* reply 1 ###\
\
The family of objections against teleology are, I think, most potentially disastrous for MacIntyre's theory. If MacIntyre's suggestion that we need to recover the Aristotelian tradition of the virtues is to be taken as a serious plan, then we must recover *telos*. \
\
The type of teleology the Aristotelian tradition takes for granted is natural teleology, of which human or social teleology is a human instantiation. The type MacIntyre needs to make his theory work is unclear. Is MacIntyre insisting on Aristotle's point, that our teleology is a "given" as part of our biological makeup? Or is he treating teleology more narrowly? Is teleological behavior not a phenomenon of nature but only a phenemonon of human beings acting intentionally? \
\
MacIntyre's view is, I think, satisfying. We can sidestep a conversation about the broader metaphysical implications of teleology. We know that *human society is teleological.* All the activities *we* do, as humans, and activities *we do* in groups are end-directed activities. Our social practices *just are* intelligibly teleological. They cannot be understood without teleology. And that is enough to get MacIntyre's ethical case off the ground. *Telos* can be recovered by reflecting on my actions, practices, and my whole life. With *telos* firmly in place as in indispensable part of my worldview, regardless of whether *telos* exists in nature more broadly, I can go on to recover the virtues.\
\
Human life is, in some sense, a practice. It can be brought under the concept of a grand unified whole practice or pluralist set of practices. Human life is, at least viewed under this concept, therefore teleological and indispensably so. Iris Murdoch argued as much in her famous essay (1950) \'93The Sovereignty of Good over other Concepts.\'94  Even if human life has \'93no external point or \uc0\u964 \u949 \u955 \u959 \u962 \'94, it has one from within. We pursue projects. It is impossible, in other words, to bring our own human life under the concept of an event. \
\
This insight has important implications for ethics, as well as other fields: action theory, sociology, anthropology, philosophy of mind, and so on. One quick example will suffice. Michael Thompson has explored the implications for \'93practical philosophy\'94 (some metaphysics, philosophy of mind, philosophy of action, and more) in his *Life and Action: Elemental Structures of Practice and Practical Thought.*[@thompson2008life] This assumption-trouncing work is radical not in its conclusions but in its simplicity and depth of insight. Thompson argues that the concepts of practice, action, and life are successively larger conceptual spheres, where the latter includes the former, but where the former is constitutive of the latter. And upon reflection, each concept exhibits an undeniable Aristotelian structure. Modern theoretical and practical philosophies that obscure these concepts or miss the mark obstruct progress in practical philosophy. \
\
While I cannot do justice to Thompson\'92s admirable work here, I mention it to point out that MacIntyre\'92s thesis about \'93social teleology\'94 \'97 the irreducibly teleological or end-directed nature of individual and group human activities \'97 seems correct. \
\
The proof of social teleology is reflection on our experience. The alternative to social teleology is fully Aristotelian natural teleology rooted in the metaphysics or in biology. For Aristotle, human end-direction is a subset of the end-direction that appears in all of nature, at least all of biological nature. \
\
MacIntyre does not need intentionality to be a subset of natural teleology. Rather, he needs his interlocutor to admit that human action is end-directed. We act to achieve goals. Whether we arise from bed *in order to* give a talk, or drive to work *in order to* do a good job, or pursue a career *for* satisfaction and a profitable retirement, we are directing ourselves toward ends. In groups, too, we deliberate about what to do, about *what is to be done*. We pursue group goals. We are directed at group ends. Congress aims to pass just and beneficial laws. The school board aims to increase enrollment and balance the budget. The university administration builds a football stadium *to draw revenue* and to create a football program.  \
\
Now, the adherent of the modern liberal tradition has two options. Either accept it and claim that type of *telos* as part of modernity; or argue that that type of *telos* is non-existent and therefore unnecessary for morality. The genealogist, again, is free to reject that type of *telos* and therefore reject morality altogether.\
\
MacIntyre has forcefully (and I think persuasively) argued, virtue without *telos* becomes an unintelligible set of rules or traditions. Virtue without *telos* literally has no point. A society that enforces chaste behavior and honors chastity as a virtue but does so without any understanding of how such chastity fits into the fulfilled life of a fully virtuous human being and a fully virtuous community will be open to the criticism that such behaviors and virtues are prohibiting a whole range of pleasurable activities.  \
\
I argued above, on behalf of the objection, that Kantianism and consequentialism are teleological. MacIntyre's response would be, I believe, to concede the point. If Kant himself can be interpreted as a teleological ethicist (of a sort), so much the better for Kantian morality. \
\
MacIntyre's critique of "emotivist" ateleological ethics may apply only to Kantians or to some readers of Kant. But if MacIntyre's analysis of the problem with modern moral philosophy is inaccurate, his solution is still accurate. Moral rules are unintelligible without an understanding of the *internal* and necessary relation between some actions and some outcomes. Kant himself, perhaps, understood this better than many of his contemporary readers give him credit. \
\
Consequentialism, however, cannot be made to be "teleological" in the Aristotelian or the MacInterean sense. The reason is that Mill has defined "consequences" so as to be always contingent. Take as a few examples this statement from G.E. Moore: \
\
>What ought we to do?  The answering of this question constitutes the third great division of ethical enquiry; and its nature was briefly explained in Chap. I (\'a7\'a7 15\'9717). It introduces into Ethics, as was there pointed out, an entirely new question\'97the question what things are related as causes to that which is good in itself; and this question can only be answered by an entirely new method\'97the method of empirical investigation; by means of which causes are discovered in the other sciences. *To ask what kind of actions we ought to perform, or what kind of conduct is right, is to ask what kind of effects such action and conduct will produce.* Not a single question in practical Ethics can be answered except by a causal generalization. All such questions do, indeed, also involve an ethical judgment proper\'97the judgment that certain effects are better, in themselves, than others. But they do assert that these better things are effects\'97are causally connected with the actions in question. Every judgment in practical Ethics may be reduced to the form: This is a cause of that good thing.[@moore Chapter 5, Section 89]\
\
Moore is explicit here that there are no acts that have intrinsic value (qua duty or qua virtuous deed); acts only have value insofar as they cause good effects. This good effects are, for Moore, aesthetic enjoyments, knowledge, and friendships.[@moore Chapter 6.] \
\
Charles Taylor explains this feature of modern moral theories:\
\
>...They cannot abide this kind of relation, in which one element is both cause and constituent of another. It is a central demand of one influential construal of modern reason that one clearly sort out means from ends. For utilitarians, the good is happiness, and virtues can only be good instrumentally... If the basic point of morality is to do the right actions, then the virtues must be seen as purely executive. They cannot also be seen as part of the end, because the end is not defined that way.[@taylor 25] \
\
I said above that the refusal to treat the means/end distinction as clean and absolute is liable to cause his critics to misunderstand his position. Charles Taylor endorses the notion that \'93the place accorded the virtues [is] a kind of litmus test for discriminating Aristotelian from modern ethical theory.\'94[@taylor 25] What could this mean? Behind the means/end distinction is a peculiarly modern assumption that formal and final causes are either not related or not *necessarily* related. There are various ways of cashing out this distinction. In biology, it is the distinction between form and function.[@huneman2006naturalising] In engineering it is the distinction between design and operation. \
\
For consequentialism, the great intrinsic value is happiness, or pleasure. On the surface, this sounds like a kind of Aristotelian eudaimonism. But Aristotle's eudaimonia is the necessary end of all action and all practical reasoning. The proof that we pursue eudaimonia (something vague) is as robust as the proof that we pursue *anything at all*. For Mill, happiness is something too specific: pleasure, or freedom from pain. He offers precious little justification for this. All that Mill can say to the enquirer who wants to hear about *why* happiness is desirable is that people desire it.\
\
>It has already been remarked, that questions of ultimate ends do not admit of proof, in the ordinary acceptation of the term. To be incapable of proof by reasoning is common to all first principles; to the first premises of our knowledge, as well as to those of our conduct. But the former, being matters of fact, may be the subject of a direct appeal to the faculties which judge of fact- namely, our senses, and our internal consciousness. Can an appeal be made to the same faculties on questions of practical ends? Or by what other faculty is cognizance taken of them?\
>Questions about ends are, in other words, questions what things are desirable. The utilitarian doctrine is, that happiness is desirable, and the only thing desirable, as an end; all other things being only desirable as means to that end. What ought to be required of this doctrine- what conditions is it requisite that the doctrine should fulfill -- to make good its claim to be believed?\
>The only proof capable of being given that an object is visible, is that people actually see it. The only proof that a sound is audible, is that people hear it: and so of the other sources of our experience. In like manner, I apprehend, the sole evidence it is possible to produce that anything is desirable, is that people do actually desire it. If the end which the utilitarian doctrine proposes to itself were not, in theory and in practice, acknowledged to be an end, nothing could ever convince any person that it was so. No reason can be given why the general happiness is desirable, except that each person, so far as he believes it to be attainable, desires his own happiness.[@mill chapter 4, "Of what sort of Proof the Principle of Utility is Susceptible"]\
\
Mill's definition of happiness cannot be that thing we all necessarily pursue whenever we act, because then moral rules (guiding us toward the happiness of the greatest number) would be unnecessary. We would all, already, pursue happiness. \
\
Furthermore, Mill, like Moore, sees the relation between the end (happiness) and the means (actions that bring about happiness) as statistical, contingent, and probable. There is no internal relation between some actions (such as virtues) and the proper end of human life.\
\
But this demand is unreasonable. Exercise *causes* (efficient causes) health; but it is partly constitutive of health. In other words, exercise *causes* (formal causes) health.  The relation between a formal cause and a final cause is an internal, natural, and necessary relation. The relation between the species *gorilla gorilla* as instantiated in an infant gorilla and a fully grown, mature one is an internal and natural and (given the proper circumstances) a necessary. relation. To deny that there are formal causes, or to deny that there are final causes, is simply to beg the question against teleological ethics. \
\
In sum, the rebuttal of the \'93no teleology objection" is that the sort of teleology we need is defensible: social teleology. On the one hand, Kantian philosophy may be able to accommodate social teleology, and so would escape the brunt of MacIntyre's criticism. On the other hand, the rebuttal of consequentialism, is that it has not often been taken to allow for a necessary relation between some means and their ends. Virtuous action both *causes* and *partly constitutes* virtuous character. Virtuous character traits both *cause* and *partly constitute* the kind of achievement of our human *telos* that makes life worth living. \
\
\
## Conclusion\
\
### Chapter summary\
MacIntyre's concepts form an organic whole. In this chapter I have tried to present his theory of virtue and practical rationality within traditions. I began by explaining MacIntyre's unique intellectual history and his unique theory of traditions. I then presented his account of virtue as necessarily existing in the context of practices, the narrative of human life, the self, and the achievement of our as-yet-unrealized *telos*. If my summaries have captured the core of MacIntyre's contribution to virtue ethics, we can offer a few conclusions with some confidence. Virtue is, for MacIntyre, primarily an acquired human trait that enables its bearer to achieve characteristically human goods that are necessarily related to human life; secondarily, we may call virtues or virtue-like those qualities that enable their bearers to achieve goods internal to social and individual practices. Practices are in part constituted by their practitioners \'97 biologists can change what biology is from within; farmers can advance what it means to farm. But practices are also constitutive of traditions. Traditions are, again, are socially embedded arguments playing out over time and across generations. And each community *needs* the virtues. \
\
Now, different traditions offer varying accounts of virtue and "lists" of virtues. MacIntyre's career has been one of struggling with the problem of disagreement in its moral, philosophical, religious, and scientific manifestations. So I presented three families of objections to MacIntyre's virtue theory: the relativism objections, the tradition-constituted rationality objections, and the no teleology objections.  \
\
I offered rebuttals of these objections. First, I further explained how MacIntyre's theory of rationality can accommodate "relativity" as a condition of inquiry without collapsing into "relativism" as a conclusion of inquiry. Second, I further clarified the concept of tradition-constituted rationality as necessarily recursive and thus impossible to define outside of the context of a tradition. I did concede that, from within my tradition, there appear to be no legitimate traditions who embrace contradictory propositions or who deny the Law of Non-Contradiction. Third, I defended MacIntyre's use of (at least) "social teleology" as a grounding for the teleological virtue ethics. And I conceded that some modern morality (such as a version of Kantianism) might plausibly be conceived as teleological in the way that MacIntyre's theory demands. But I denied that other modern moralities (such as paradigmatic versions of consequentialism) can be conceived as teleological in the proper way since they treat the relation of means to ends as a merely contingent relation. \
\
If MacIntyre is right here, then the project of restoring *telos* should invigorate optimism. Ethics, reinvigorated with teleology, might just be able to escape some of its modern quandaries. And not only ethics. Law, political philosophy, and applied disciplines like politics itself, rhetoric and debate, social philosophy, and others disciplines are given new promise and new hope. \
\
Though MacIntyre\'92s theories are built on many implicit assumptions, each of which a critic might make explicit and dispute, the conclusion we have found some reason to believe is that virtues are qualities inherently related to the teleology of practice. Human life, action, and practice are all teleological or end-directed. \
\
### Two concluding remarks ###\
\
I would like to close this chapter with a reflection on MacIntyre's unique style of enquiry, which is polarizing. \
\
MacIntyre is a theorist of rationality (and of practical rationality and hence virtue). Hence rationally to assess his theory requires thinking through our own theory of rationality. But thinking about rationality is thinking through our own thinking. The errors we make in thinking are likely to be underscored by our attempts to *think them through*. The Greek proverb is: \'93If water chokes us, what shall we drink?\'94 The Latin proverb (from a very different context) is \'93Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?\'94 \'97 who will guard the guards themselves? I believe the answer to the rhetorical question is *no one at all* can guard the guards; if water chokes us, there is *nothing at all we can drink to wash it down*. Likewise, if something is deeply wrong with the way we think, how can theorizing about rationality right the wrong? Some of the errors MacIntyre diagnoses in thinkers who belong to the modern liberal Enlightenment tradition will be invisible to those thinkers. \
\
Even if MacIntyre\'92s diagnosis is *correct* -- especially if it is correct -- the readers who especially need to hear it will find the diagnosis unintelligible, even irrational. Insofar as the "patient" finds any parts of his theory intelligible, they will seem radical, disastrous in their social implications, and destructive of the very nature and purpose of education. The reason these appearances will be insuperable to MacIntyre\'92s patient is because the patient is, by his lights, self-deceived. He or she simply denies being part of a tradition, and hence denies having a particular (rather than universal) tradition-bound conception of rationality, and hence denies having a particular, tradition-bound conception of the good (perhaps the good is unbounded freedom to follow the moral law, or to pursue happiness,, and justice unfettered equality). Modernity is the \'93tradition-less tradition\'94 and hence *must* deny tradition to be consistent with itself. \
\
The solution to this paradox is that MacIntyre directs *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* and other books at the liberal modern who is discontented with the tradition. This "patient" comes to MacIntyre with manifesting symptoms. MacIntyre offers one possible diagnosis, and the patient\'92s job is to investigate further. The patient needs philosophical imagination to even *consider* the possibility of another truth. The patient needs patience, intellectual courage, and self-reflection. The patient needs to sit in front of the proverbial mirror and mouth the words, (a) \'93I am part of a tradition\'94 and (b) \'93my tradition might be inadequate,\'94 and (c) \'93that other tradition might have the resources more adequately to address the intellectual and practical problems that I now see are insuperable to my tradition.\'94 \
\
For example, MacIntyre's theory can answer the worry about relativism discussed above. Yet for some critics the worry still clings. I would suggest that full resolution of the criticism can only come through self-reflection by the critics on themselves. MacIntyre\'92s dialectic, properly understood, invites even critics to self-reflection. This is a kind of *resolution* of the criticism. For, to accept this invitation is, in some sense, to join MacIntyre in the enquiry, which is to either lay down the criticism or persist in making it from a new vantage point within the enquiry. By contrast, to deny the invitation is not *strictly speaking an objection* but a sociological or psychological move, a decision not to become part of that enquiry. This not the \'93victory\'94 of the objection over MacIntyre\'92s theory, but a refusal to allow MacIntyre\'92s theory to define the terms of the enquiry. \
\
It should come as no surprise to us, if we have come to terms with the debate, that both sides think the other side not merely *wrong* but *irrational*. Enormous metaphilosophical disputes are in the offing. One side "just isn\'92t doing philosophy anymore." My only point here is that *which side that is* is far from clear. Or, put differently, it is all too clear to modern, liberal philosophers that Thomistic \'93philosophy\'94 isn\'92t philosophy at all.[@lutz2004tradition chapter 5.] It is all to clear to modern, Aristotelian-type philosophers that modern secular \'93philosophy\'94 isn\'92t philosophy at all. Two opponents within a tradition can think the other side mistaken but fundamentally rational. Two opponents from opposing traditions more often think the other side \'93crazy\'94 or \'93nuts\'94 or \'93mad\'94, \'93bonkers\'94, or some other synonym for less-than-rational. \
\
A second concluding remark is my tentative suggestion as to MacIntyre's legacy. One feature we might observe about great thinkers \'97 Plato, Aquinas, Kant, and a dozen of others \'97 is that they present a totalizing theory that explains many phenomena but also explains why critics criticize. Great thinkers present not only philosophical solutions to philosophical problems, but a definition or understanding of philosophy itself. They are always philosophers *and* metaphilosophers. This feature satisfies their followers and frustrates their critics. For to criticize such a thinker feels like falling into a well-laid trap. One of the signs, I believe, of MacIntyre\'92s greatness is just this feature. He presents not only isolated theories but a theoretical system in which critics, depending on their criticism, receive a name, a number, a category, a classification, and a designated response. Adherents, too, are accommodated. But to criticize MacIntyre is much trickier business than one might suspect at first. Critics find themselves dipping into one of many already well-poisoned wells, and falling into pre-laid traps. The critic who would escape the battery is more likely to flee rather than engage; but the critic who would escape by engaging and overcoming is liable to meet her match. Again, while this may be infuriating, I believe it to be a sign of greatness. \
}