{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 4. **No Telos \'97 Metaphysical Biology Objection.** 
\b0 \
\
MacIntyre himself rejected Aristotle's "metaphysical biology" in *After Virtue*. He later changed his mind on this point. But critics might worry that the notion of social teleology is too bound up with discredited pre-modern notions about nature. \
\
### Metaphysical Biology Objection\
\
MacIntyre's whole ethical case is built on the recovery of telos. Without telos, there can be no virtue. \
\
### We need telos for virtue because deontological virtues are too hard ##\
\
He has forcefully (and I think persuasively) argued, virtue without telos becomes unintelligible. A society that highly values some virtue (say, chastity) but does so only out of habit --  without any wisp of certain knowledge about the effect chastity has on a man or woman's whole life --  will not long retain that high opinion. Chastity as a white-knuckle fiat not to engage in sexual intercourse with anyone other than one's opposite-sex spouse is simply too difficult, psychologically and morally, to seem valuable to someone who has no clue why chastity is so good for us, and why sexual license is so disastrous for humans, families, and societies. \
\
### Telos and virtue (and life, and self) are an organic whole ##\
\
If MacIntyre's suggestion that we need to recover the Aristotelian tradition of the virtues is to be taken as a serious plan, then we must recover telos. That is, we must discover or re-discover the organic holism of the narrative unity of my life, my identity and self-concept, the telos of human life as a species and my own specific telos as a member of that species, and the virtues that are the qualities that enable me to achieve my telos. Not one of these parts can be left out of the whole. \
\
### What if there are no ends in nature? ##\
\
One powerful objection to the recovery of telos is that there is no teleology in nature. There are no *ends* (\uc0\u964 \u949 \u955 \u959 \u953 ). Call this position *teleological nihilism.* There are two forms of teleological nihilism: extreme and moderate. Extreme teleological nihilism we may call the view that there are no "purposes" or natural ends anywhere in the world *including* in human actions. Even our practices, behaviors, and lives are purposeless, even to ourselves. Moderate teleological nihilism we may call the view that there are no natural purposes *except* those in human actions, intentions, and societies, etc. On moderate teleological nihilism, human purposes are not instances of a broader category that includes the tendency of an acorn to become an oak and the tendency of deer to survive and reproduce; human purposes are sui generis phenomena that spontaneously emerge out of our brains at a certain level of complexity. Final causation thinking is then projected out onto the world by us; we observe that the beaver gathered wood and that the beaver built a dam and we say "the beaver gathered wood *in order to* build the dam." But really the beaver did no such thing. This is what philosopher of biology Ernst Mayr calls "teleonomic" natural behavior, but not genuinely teleological.[@mayr1992teleology] \
\
Teleological nihilism claims as its evidence *modern science* as a whole. Natural sciences have dismissed the notion of final causation for three or four centuries now and have gotten along well without it. In fact, natural sciences and the experimental, empirical methods that advance them have progressed far more than anyone could have dreamed. In part, this success is the result of giving up magical thinking. \
\
### What if ends are reducible? ###\
\
Teleoreductionism has taken one of two popular forms: \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
the first reduces 'teleonomic' (that is, apparently teleological) biological functions to causal contributions to a system and the second reduces teleonomic biological functions to naturally selected effects. A proponent of the first reduction is Donald Davidson; a proponent of the second is Ruth Millikan. \
\
### Reducible reply ###\
\
Neither forms of 'teleoreduction' can account for the normativity of the biological function in question. If hearts simply cause %%\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa200
\cf0 James Barham elaborates:  I was aware of well-known criticisms of both of the then-current reductionist accounts of function: the "causal-role" theory and the Darwin-inspired "selected-effects" theory. In a nutshell, the problem is that neither theory can explain the 
\i normative
\i0  character of biological processes in a coherent manner. (Biological processes are "normative" in the sense that they may either 
\i succeed
\i0 or 
\i fail
\i0  in fulfilling their functions.) With respect to the "causal-role" theory, there is no way to distinguish between functional and non-functional parts of a biological system without presupposing the normative character of the overall system as a whole -- which begs the question at issue.\
With respect to the "selected-effects" theory, the problem is that selection history is conceptually irrelevant to the identification of function. True, it has a role to play in explaining how present-day functions have come to exist. But selection history cannot possibly explain what it is about a biological process that constitutes it 
\i as
\i0  a function. This is a logical point that Darwinists simply miss. The reason is that our 
\i concept
\i0  of function in no way depends on evolutionary history. If it did, then biologists like Aristotle, Galen, Harvey, and innumerable others who lived long before Darwin would not have had the means to identify the functions of organs, which they of course did. Sometimes, they got it wrong, as when Aristotle placed the seat of perception and thought in the heart, instead of the brain (though some of his predecessors got it right). But Aristotle's mistake was due to his inadequate knowledge of physiology, not to his ignorance of evolution."\
\
Millikan bites the bullet on this objection. She isn't trying to do "conceptual analysis" of the term 'function.' She is willing to admit that her concept of proper function only applies to functional objects with histories and that hypothetical counterexamples involving functional objects without histories prove that two objects with one and the same "*mark* of purposiveness" can have different functions.[\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ### No Telos Reply ###\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
### Even if there were no natural teloi, human action is teleological\
\
MacIntyre has a powerful response to this objection. It is, I think, satisfying. And that is that the conversation about the broader metaphysical implications of teleology can be side-stepped. We know that *human society is teleological.* All the activities *we* do, as humans, and activities *we do* in groups (the Republican or Democratic Party, the YMCA, the U.S.A., the Parent Teacher Association, Starbucks) is end-directed actions and practices. That is enough. Call it "social teleology." \
\
Christine Korsgaard has defended the notion of practical reason as the faculty we discover in ourselves *after* we are already acting in the world and reflecting upon our actions.[@korsgaard1996authority] It is not really up for debate that we are reflective creatures; everyone reading this is capable of reflecting on their actions, asking for and providing *reasons* for action that may or may not justify the action. This is close, I think, to MacIntyre's way of thinking. \
\
Our social practices *just are* intelligibly teleological. They cannot be understood without teleology. And that is enough to get MacIntyre's ethical case off the ground. Telos can be recovered by reflecting on my actions, practices, and my whole life. With telos firmly in place as in indispensable part of my worldview, regardless of whether telos exists in nature more broadly, I can go on to recover the virtues.\
\
### Human action is teleological\
\
One thesis I would like to extract, develop, and defend is this: human practices are necessarily end-directed (teleological). \'93Social teleology\'94 has at least two and possibly three aspects: individual, collective, and human. The first aspect of social teleology is the end-directed behavior of each agent; the second is the end-directed behavior of social groups, like families, nations, clubs, congregations, and so on. The third, and most objectionable, aspect, is the end-directed activity of our species as a whole. What, if anything, does every human being intentionally pursue? \
\
The answer to this question is bound to be controversial. But before we try to answer it we can pause and point out that MacIntyre has made the question intelligible and urgent. \
\
Human life is, in some sense, a practice. It can be brought under the concept of a grand unified whole practice or pluralist set of practices. Human life is, at least viewed under this concept, therefore teleological and indispensably so. Iris Murdoch argued as much in her famous essay (1950) \'93The Sovereignty of Good over other Concepts.\'94  Even if human life has \'93no external point or \uc0\u964 \u949 \u955 \u959 \u962 \'94, it has one from within. We pursue projects. It is impossible, in other words, to bring our own human life under the concept of an event. \
\
This insight has important implications for ethics, as well as other fields: action theory, sociology, anthropology, philosophy of mind, and so on. I shall not explore those implications here. Michael Thompson has explored the implications for \'93practical philosophy\'94 (some metaphysics, philosophy of mind, philosophy of action, and more) in his *Life and Action: Elemental Structures of Practice and Practical Thought.*[@thompson2008life] This assumption-trouncing work is radical not in its conclusions but in its simplicity and depth of insight. Thompson argues that the concepts of practice, action, and life are successively larger conceptual spheres, where the latter includes the former, but where the former is constitutive of the latter. And upon reflection, each concept exhibits an undeniable Aristotelian structure. Modern theoretical and practical philosophies that obscure these concepts or miss the mark obstruct progress in practical philosophy. \
\
While I cannot do justice to Thompson\'92s admirable work here, I mention it to point out that MacIntyre\'92s thesis about \'93social teleology\'94 \'97 the irreducibly teleological or end-directed nature of individual and group human activities \'97 seems correct. And if it is correct, it demands the re-evaluation of some cherished assumptions. \
\
\
### Biological Teleology\
\
Teleological realism in biology is making a come-back. There are those who protest teleological nihilism. Arnhart persuasively argues that teleology is assumed in medicine.[@arnhart1988] Zammito clarifies ongoing relevance in biology, since organisms seem to be intrinsically purposeful.[@zammito2006teleology]\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
In a series of important articles and books over the past decade or so, Bedau (1990, 1992a, 1992b, 1993), Cameron (2004), Christensen & Bickhard (2002), Jacobs (1986), Manning (1997), Maund (2000), McLaughlin (2001, 2009), Mossio et al. (2009), Mundale & Bechtel (1996), Nanay (2010), Nissen (1997), Perovic (2007), Walsh (2006), and Zammito (2006) have cast grave doubt on the coherence of any reductive analysis of function. Some of these authors (e.g., Jacobs, Maund, Zammito) call explicitly for a reconsideration of the possibility that teleological phenomena in biology might be both objectively real and irreducible. \
The very word 'teleology' is liable to sound quaint to modern ears. Barnham clarifes the range of terms that denote identical or similar concepts: \
\
>"By \'93teleology,\'94 I have in mind such words and concepts as \'93purpose,\'94 \'93end,\'94 \'93goal,\'94 \'93function,\'94 \'93control,\'94 and \'93regulation,\'94 as well as the real- world biological phenomena to which these words and concepts refer. This means that the word \'93teleology\'94 should always be construed here in its internal or \'93immanent\'94 sense\'97purposiveness existing in living beings themselves\'97and never in its external or \'93transcendent\'94 sense of an overarching cosmic principle" (Barnham 1). For a similar distinction, see Lennox (1992) and Brown (2001). \
\
We can add "purposive" and "goal-directed" to the constellation of concepts in the offing. \
\
#### Kinds of teleology ####\
\
// There are some distinctions I've already drawn up in an earlier draft. Insert those here. }