{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\
\
### Practical appraisal and action\
\
MacIntyre puts a similar point in different terms. His earliest ethical work distinguished the significance of moral judgments compared to other kinds of judgments. In a careful critique of both intuitionists such as Moore and emotivists such as Stevenson, MacIntyre concluded that both (mistakenly) assume that moral judgments and moral terms have significance only in their referential meaning. The intuitionists, of course, concluded that moral terms refer to a non-natural property, while the emotivists concluded that moral terms do not refer to such a property and so do not refer at all. (Naturalists, later in the 20th century, argue that moral terms refer to natural properties.) MacIntyre\'92s alternative denies the assumption entirely; moral judgments \'93have their own kind of logic\'94 and their significance, like other kinds of judgments, comes from \'93exhibiting the logic of their usage.\'94[@@murphy2003macintyre 118, quoting p. 73 of MacIntyre\'92s master\'92s thesis *The Significance of Moral Judgments*] The significance of moral judgments is that \'93they enable us to solve problems of appraisal and of action.\'94 That is their place in \'93a pattern of language and action\'85\'94 He continues: \
\
>Above all they arise out of the way in which we see the world and the way in which our language allows us to see the world. We cannot sufficiently emphasize the direction given to our appraisals by the language which happens to be available for our descriptions. It is as we see the facts that we judge the world.\
\
MacIntyre\'92s point is that moral judgments are not *simply* useful in moral dilemmas or quandaries. They appear, at the earliest stages of childhood development, in a pattern of usage that is inextricable from the human activities of reasoning, acting, and appraising. Evaluative judgments appear in the widest imaginable spread of human activities, from politics to playgrounds, from sociology to social life, from the practices of law and medicine to the professions of journalism and psychology, from the sciences to the arts. \
\
Even if this point be granted, moral dilemmas are not *unreal*. Moral dilemmas are a special version of our general \'93problems of appraisal and action.\'94 They may be particularly vexing, but they are no different from the general problems of how to live, how to be happy, what kinds of public policies to pursue, what apparently meaningful types of life are really meaningful. \
\
The word \'93ethical\'94 is sometimes taken to have a broader connotation than the narrow \'93moral,\'94 but I think such distinctions etymologically suspect. As MacIntyre summarizes: \'93\'91moral\'92 is the etymological descendant of \'91moralis\'92. But \'91moralis\'92, like its Greek predecessor ethikos \'97 I invented \'91moralis\'92 to translate the Greek word in the De Fato \'97 means \'91pertaining to character\'92 where a man\'92s character is nothing other than his set dispositions to behave systematically in one way rather than another, to lead on particular kind of life.\'94[@macintyre1984after 38] The early uses of Moral did not contrast with \'93\'91prudential\'92 or \'91self interested\'92\'94 nor with \'93\'91legal or \'91religious\'92\'94. MacIntyre concludes: \'93The word to which it is closest in meaning is perhaps most simply \'91practical\'92.\'94\
\
Practicality as a whole domain was sub-divided. The conventional distinction that \'93morality\'94 is a special sub-division pertaining to right and wrong behavior toward others traces to the 1700s, where \'93immorality\'94 meant sexual misbehavior.  The conventional separation of \'93moral\'94 from \'93non-moral\'94 considerations traces to John Stuart Mill who divided the former domain as concerned with duties to benefit and to not harm others. \
\
>Many if not most moral philosophers in modern times see their subject as having to do exclusively with relations between individuals or between an individual and society, and so with such things as obligations, duties, and charitable acts. It is for this reason that, of the four ancient cardinal virtues of justice, courage, temperance, and wisdom, only the first now seems to belong wholly to \'91morality\'92. The other three virtues are recognized as necessary for the practice of \'91morality\'92 but are now thought of as having part of their exercise \'91outside morality\'92 in \'91self\uc0\u8208 regarding\'92 pursuits, \'91moral\'92 and \'91prudential\'92 considerations being contrasted in a way that was alien to Plato or Aristotle.4 J. S. Mill, for instance, expresses this modern point of view quite explicitly, saying in his essay On Liberty that \'91A person who shows rashness, obstinacy, self\u8208 conceit .\'a0.\'a0. who cannot restrain himself from harmful indulgences\'92 shows faults (Mill calls them \'91self\u8208 regarding faults\'92) which \'91are not properly immoralities\'92 and while they \'91may be proofs of any amount of folly .\'a0.\'a0. are only a subject of moral reprobation when they involve a breach of duty to others, for whose sake the individual is bound to have care for himself\'92.[foot2001natural68]\
\
As one MacIntyre scholar puts it: \'91The term practical rationality is derived from Aristotle\'92s *phronesis*. It is to be distinguished from *sophia*, a more technical form of reasoning. Practical rationality leads to more approximate conclusions; it takes context and relative facts into account, and it usually leads to moral or political conclusions.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 60-61] If we take philosophical ethics to be reflection on morality as a whole then, on this view, philosophical ethics is reflection on practical rationality. Practical rationality is simply the process of deciding what to do. It is the process of thinking through what to do. Or, in Gibbard\'92s unforgettable phrasing, it is \'93thinking how to live\'94.[@gibbard2009thinking] \
\
Rosalind Hursthouse likewise says that: \'93The concept of a virtue is the concept of something that makes its possessor good: a virtuous person is a morally good, excellent or admirable person who acts and feels well, rightly, as she should. These are commonly accepted truisms.\'94[@sepvirtue] These truisms encompass our everyday moral judgments about who is admirable much more broadly than our judgments about who is morally upstanding or who avoids being morally despicable. There is more to being an admirable person than *avoiding* transgressions. Nicholas Gier\'92s memorable image of the \'93couch potato\'94 illustrates this point. The Couch Potato works a mindless job  which he is able adequately to perform while watching television (and today we can add, checking his Facebook and Twitter feeds); he rarely rises except to receive himself and microwave his dinners; he is even religious, watching his favorite preachers on Sunday morning television and tithing regularly. Yet the couch potato is by my standards living a wasted life and pitiable life. (I am counting on your similar intuition.) We do not want to imprison him for being such a failure; but we certainly do not admire how he lives. \
\
By contrast, admirable people command our respect for being morally upstanding, and so much more. We admire them for their brains, their guts, their strength, their rare talents, their outstanding achievements, their unimaginable creativity, their wit and eloquence. Some people are remarkable for *what they are given* (great beauty, great intelligence, and so on). But the admirable person is remarkable not just for good fortune. In fact, admirable people are often admirable for overcoming extraordinarily bad fortune. We truly admire *what they do* with *what they are given*. In a word, we admire how they live. \
\
Julia Annas\'92 presentation of virtue as as a skill illuminates this same point, I think, beautifully. She says, I should develop an account of virtue in which I show have central to the idea that the practical reasoning of the virtuous person is analogous in important ways\'85 to the practical reasoning of someone who's exercising a practical skill.\'94[@annas2011intelligent 3]. What she calls the \'93skill analogy\'94 might be taken as problematic since it drains the peculiarly *moral* quality out of virtue; but we might reverse this worry. The skill analogy colors even living one\'92s daily life with the moral quality of virtue. The virtuous person is *good at* and not just *good* \'97 good at helping others, good at thinking ahead, good at human life. The vicious person, by contrast, is not just bad but *bad at* the essential elements of human life. Of course, being born with a paucity of natural talents is not a matter of immorality. \
\
How did this broad sense of morality as living life excellently narrow? \
\
### How did the meaning of \'91morality\'92 narrow? \
\
First, it meant any particular way of life \'97 something like idiosyncrasy, habit, character. Second, any practical lesson \'97 something like the \'93moral of the story\'94, the point, that to be acted on, the rule, the maxim. Third, a domain of rules of conduct that are \'93neither theological nor legal nor aesthetic\'94[@macintyre1984after 39]\
\
Anscombe notes: \
\
>The terms \'93should\'94 or \'93ought\'94 or \'93needs\'94 relate to good and bad: e.g. machinery needs oil, or should or ought to be oiled, in that running without oil is bad for it, or it runs badly without oil. According to this conception, of course, "should" and "ought" are not used in a special "moral" sense when one says that a man should not bilk. (In Aristotle's sense of the term "moral" [\uc0\u942 \u952 \u953 \u954 \u972 \u962 ], they are being used in connection with a moral subject\u8209 matter: namely that of human passions and [non\u8209 technical] actions.) But they have now acquired a special so\u8209 called "moral" sense-\u8209 i.e. a sense in which they imply some absolute verdict (like one of guilty/not guilty on a man) on what is described in the "ought" sentences used in certain types of context: not merely the contexts that Aristotle would call "moral"\u8209 -passions and actions\u8209 -but also some of the contexts that he would call "intellectual.\'94[@anscombe1958]\
\
The equation between moral and intellectual excellence is not obvious for us. The notion that morality has to do with absolute verdicts is not obvious to Aristotle \'97 nor to contemporary neo-Aristotelian virtue ethicists. \
\
Kant admits the apparent inconsistency in radically dividing speculative or theoretical reason from practical reason: \
>Here first is explained the enigma of the critical philosophy, viz. :how we deny objective reality to the supersensible use of the categories in speculation and yet admit this reality with respect to the objects of pure practical reason. This must at first seem inconsistent as long as this practical use is only nominally known.[@kantpracticalreason]\
\
\
### Three Dimensions of Practical Reason\
\
Now, the domain of duties and obligations pertaining to others is a real domain and a legitimate division. But the division is not between morality and non-morality but between different types of morality or sub-domains. I shall call this domain \'932nd-personal morality\'94, that is, my duties to you or to you all. This domain is vast. But there are other domains for the 1st-person and 3rd-person. \
\
The entire set is the domain of practicality \'97 what one ought to do or ought to think, say, etc. The three sub-domains are defined by the object with regard to which one ought to do and not do this or that. \
\
The domain of 1st-person morality is proper respect and care for one\'92s self \'97 self-love or enlightened self-interest. This is what Mill called the domain of \'93prudence\'94. It includes the virtues that benefit both oneself and others (moderation and courage) but especially practical wisdom, without which none of the other virtues do me much good. \
\
The domain of 3rd-person morality is proper respect and care for everything that is not you or me \'97 animals and plants, pets and work animals, our possessions, our earth and environment, and perhaps even our solar system. The primary virtue of this domain is justice, a respect for the whole and the proper arrangement of all the parts. If God exists, then 3rd-personal morality would require piety to him or her, since on most theisms God is not strictly speaking \'93one of us\'94 but still demands our allegiance, sacrifice, or what have you. \
\
The domain of 2nd-person morality, I said, is vast. It includes interpersonal moral obligations, values, and virtues as well as broader social or political ones. I suggest that the dominant virtue here is not only justice but love \'97 I.e., a strong regard for the other, a charitable orientation to promoting the good of others, refusing to harm them, and committing to protect them from harm. \
\
\
\
Foot argues, I think rightly, that qualities such as benevolence and generosity we tend to call human \'93moral goodness\'94 are of a type with a broader category of goodness.  She says: \'93I want to show that judgments usually considered to be the special subject of moral philosophy should really be seen as belonging to a wider class of evaluations of conduct with which they share a common conceptual structure.\'94 [@foot2001natural 66-67] \
\
The argument is simple: We act on reasons. We pursue what is good, or what seems good. There are various types of good; hence there are various types of reasons. But we do not act *only* on one type of reason: moral reasons. Rather, we weigh and balance all the salient reasons we are aware of at the time when we deliberate and make decisions. In making a business transaction, the entrepreneur may allow considerations of justice to outweigh considerations of profit; or, he may allow considerations about loyalty to a friend outweighs considerations of justice. These two paths are not, respectively, \'93the moral\'94 path and the immoral path. They are both moral and both practical; they both weigh and attempt to negotiate the best reasons to act in this way rather than that, all things considered.\
\
\
So I conclude that the domain of morality is, if anything at all, the sub-domain of practical reason concerned with obligations, duties, rights, goods, and harms that might obtain between one member of society to another. This way of putting the classification clearly connects \'93morality\'94 with politics, family life, education, and so on. However, it paints in bright and burning colors the distinction between morality as a part of practical reason and practice itself. We are, first, and foremost, practical creatures, not merely moral or moralizing ones. \
\
\
We can add to these arguments a Moorean shift: why do we moderns *assume* that there is a special domain of the moral? The ancient and medieval philosophers in the west thought of the domain of practical reason as a natural unit: all that is voluntary or under our control may be done well or badly. Our goal in living well is to to identify what to think, what to do, and what to make. As a corollary, we must identify what not to think, what not to do, and what not to make. But shrinking the whole domain of practical reason down to the domain of a few absolute prohibitions on harming others is a modern innovation. If it is right, then it is a modern invention. If it is wrong, it is a modern ignorance. Either way, its proponent needs, I think, to offer some account of why such a shrinking amounts to progress rather than regress in moral theorizing. \
\
\
## 2. Is practical reason instrumental? \
\
Although it seems reason is instrumental, rational motives are inherently related to *ends* seen as good; the first principle of practical reason is "pursue the good".\
\
\
## 3. Is moral reasoning a special type of practical reasoning? \
\
Although it seems that moral reasoning is the process of judging actions as right or wrong, or resolving moral dilemmas, or identifying a special property "goodness", moral reasoning is the business of pursuing what is worthwhile,  appraising action decide what to do. \
\
\
\
## 5. Is morality about oneself or only others?\
\
Although it seems "morality" is narrowly about how we treat others, it is about self- and other-regarding virtues.\
\
\
\
## 6. Is there only one virtue? \
\
Although it seems that there are no other virtues because all virtue is knowledge, there are other virtues related to other cognitive and affective features of human nature, each of which, nevertheless, depends on and enhances practical reason. \
\
*The virtue of practical reason is, not surprisingly, practical *wisdom*. Yet practical wisdom is strange and likely to be misunderstand: it is both theoretical (aiming at knowing what's true) and practical (aiming at what to do). To co-opt a phrase from Alan Gibbard:^[I\'92m not sure Gibbard would appreciate my use of the phrase.] our activity of practical reasoning is "thinking how to live.\'94[@gibbard2009thinking. I take the activity of thinking what to do in a far more realist direction than Gibbard. However, I have noticed with pleasure that Gibbard himself has become more open to realism in the recent years. He asks us to suppose that \'93normative realists are right about how normative concepts act\'94 (xii), and only wishes to establish the possibility of the truth of his hypothesis that \'93the meaning of this phrase \'91the thing to do\'92 is explained expressionistically: if I assert \'93Fleeing is the thing to do\'94, I thereby express a state of mind, deciding to flee.\'94 (8) He says he is a \'93naturalist about humanity, about human thinking and planning, but in a sense I end up a non-naturalist about *oughts*. Much of what non-naturalists say is right, I conclude\'97but this needn\'92t be mysterious to any naturalist.\'94 (xii)] So practical wisdom is knowing how to live, and *really knowing* it. Stated this way, it is easy to see why some have argued that practical wisdom is the *only* virtue. If one knows exactly how to live, in each circumstance, in each challenge, according to proper reasons, and for proper motives, what more to virtue could there be? Maggie Little[@little2007virtue] argues that virtue is a species of knowledge; John McDowell[@mcdowell1979virtue] argues something similar.* So why bother dividing up various virtues? \
\
I do not think Aristotle himself was perfectly clear on this point. Though he divides up intellectual virtues into prudence, science, intellect, judgment, understanding, deliberation, and so on (Greek: phronesis, sophia, nous, gnome, sunesis, eubolia respectively), and though he says that prudence (knowledge about changing particulars) is inferior to wisdom (science about unchanging universals), nevertheless he says the absence of prudence ruins all other aspiring virtues.[@aristotle NE, VI] \
\
\
## 7. Is practical reason objective like logic?\
\
Although it seems that practical reason is universal and objective like logic; it is intersubjective like logic; nevertheless, it is objective; it can be universal across cultures and traditions.\
\
\
*Practical reason is supposed by some to resolve possible worries about cultural relativism with regard to virtue.*\
\
1. It seems that practical reason is not objective since people disagree. \
2. It seems to not be objective because it arises only in community. \
2. On the other hand, Shafer-Landau argues that ethics is a species of philosophy. \
4. I argue that practical reason is as objective as theoretical reason (whether both are objective or not). \
\
\
1. It seems that practical reason is not objective since people disagree. \
\
The question of how to live, and of how to resolve pressing moral disputes and dramatic moral conundrums, is not easy. There are various answers. People disagree.\
\
Anyone who has long engaged in dialectical disputes over the various answer to the normative question of how to live well eventually comes to ask a secondary question: is there even any truth to be found? Are there any \'91right answers\'92 in ethics? Is there anything to all this discussion besides gas? Some worry that ethics has no \'91right answers\'92 because it is all just intuition-pumping. Some people view ethics as too easy because it is only a discussion of one\'92s opinion. \
\
We must admit that normative ethical conclusions \'97 whatever conclusions satisfy us at the end of a long philosophical discussion about what is good and right \'97 are different from conclusions in paleontology, medicine, or calculus. What does the difference amount to? Why is ethics *as a discipline* so different from, say, natural sciences? \
\
There are two sorts of interpretations of ethics as a discipline in light of the diversity of answers to the question about how to live well. The first is Hume\'92s answer, that ethics is \'93easy\'94 (while metaphysics, philosophy of mind, and philosophical anthropology are presumably difficult). \
\
The second is Aristotle\'92s, that ethics is *a different sort of science* because it has a *different subject matter* to which it must correspond. He says, \'93For a well schooled man is wanting searches for that degree of precision in each kind of study which the nature of the subject at hand admits: is obviously just as foolish to accept arguments of probability from a mathematician has to demand strict demonstrations from an orator.\'94 [@aristotle Book I.3]\
\
By the traditional classification, ethics is a form of philosophy. Russ Shafer-Landau persuasively argues this simple equation in defense of moral realism[@shafer2007ethics] but the point has broader import. If ethics is *not* a species of philosophy, it is something else entirely. Perhaps it is a species of politics. Such a categorization assumes, at the outset, that power prevails over truth. But to concede that there are no right answers in ethics, that ethical philosophers have no hope of finding any ethical truth is to give up on ethics as a discipline. \
\
So suppose ethics is a species of philosophy. The indirect answer is another question: Are there \'91right answers\'92 in philosophy? Isn\'92t the relation of philosophy in general to ethics in particular the relation of genus to species? This is the relation Russ Shafer-Landau argues for.[@shafer2012ethics] So the fate of ethical claims or ethical theories hangs on the fate of philosophical claims and theories as a whole. If we are philosophical optimists at all \'97 if we are not total skeptics or nihilists \'97 then we can be ethical optimists. \
\
So what species of philosophy is ethics? If philosophy is its genus, what is its differentia? As I have been arguing, ethics is the discipline of practical reason. There are \'91right answers\'92 in ethics since there are right ways to live one\'92s life, there are wells to live well and ways to live poorly; things can go well or badly for us. One of the fundamental governing assumptions of this work is that there is no special domain of the moral. Value theory is a whole package. There is at bottom no intelligible distinction between morality and prudence. \
\
\
2. It seems to not be objective because it arises only in community. \
\
Tradition-constituted rationality was supposed to explain why practices can vary between people and traditions that both claim to be rational and believe the rival to be irrational; the process of switching between traditions explains, from within a tradition, one can rationally adjudicate these disagreements. This is why *practical rationality* is so important for MacIntyre's theory of *virtue.* \
\
[^14]:  *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* and *Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry* treat rationality as the ground of ethical reasoning, while *After Virtue* and *Dependent Rational Animals* treat ethical reasoning as practical reasoning. \
\
Nevertheless, worries about relativism may linger. For MacIntyre, virtues are relative to practices; practices are relative to traditions; traditions are relative to conceptions of rationality. His answer to this worry is, I believe, the crux of his whole theory of ethics. It appeals to two concepts that are, for him, intimately bound up with each other. The two concepts are practical reason and human nature. *Dependent Rational Animals* is the capstone to address lingering worries about relativism. \
\
The project of *Dependent Rational Animals* is to insist that human beings are animals even if we are animals of a particular and unusual sort; and that our dependence and vulnerability are as morally significant as our independence, autonomy, or self-sufficiency. In other words, there are virtues of both autonomy *and* dependence. The book also contends that certain social arrangements are conducive to the transmission and sustenance of both kinds of virtue.  \
\
Let\'92s consider a key quotation on each of these themes. Regarding the notion that we are unusual animals, MacIntyre argues at length that the human differentia (be it language, reason, practical reason, self-consciousness, or what have you) does not eradicate the commonalities between us and other animals. He says: \
\
>I shall contend that although our differences from all other species are certainly of crucial importance, it is also important that both initially in our earliest childhood activities and to some extent thereafter we comport ourselves towards the world in much the same way as other intelligent animals. Indeed our ability to transcend those limitations depends in part upon certain of those animal characteristics among them the nature of our identity.[@macintyre1999dependent 8] \
\
The point, I take it, is that rational animals is *what we are*. If we cannot escape our identity as animals who are (potentially) practically rational, then we cannot escape our need for certain virtues. Furthermore, some activities will militate against our growing up to become fully practical rationality; these are vices. What kind of animal are we? We are by nature practical reasoners. Imagine any scenario of humans gathering and doing what comes naturally, and it will involve group deliberation about what to do: High school students debating about where to sit at lunch; couples arguing over the budget; political leaders proposing new laws; philosophy department meetings making hiring and admissions decisions. It is impossible (for fully functioning adults) to live life even for a full day without engaging in such reasoning. The pattern is the same. Groups of humans engage in practical reasoning \'97 a community thinking what to do. \
\
A second point is that human life is not one continuous phase of adulthood; it begins with youth and ends with old age. So MacIntyre breaks important new ground in explaining the relation between virtues of independence and "virtues of acknowledged dependence." He argues that the vulnerability, fragility, and affliction characteristic especially of early childhood and old age are highly morally significant. As he says:  \
\
>Virtues of independent rational agency need for their adequate exercise to be accompanied by what I shall call the virtues of acknowledge dependence and that a failure to understand this is apt to secure some features of rational agency. Moreover both sets of virtues are needed in order to actualize the distinctive potentialities that are specific to the human rational animal. Identifying how and why they are needed is a prerequisite for understanding their central place in the kind of human life through which human flourishing can be achieved.[@macintyre1999dependent 8] \
\
There is an obvious -- and I think exciting -- connection here with the ethics of care. Many others in the Aristotelian tradition have noticed the significance that we have the potential to be rational, and the potential to be independent reasoners. Fewer, until recently, have noticed the significance of dependence.[Cf @held2005ethics. There is an obvious overlap with some feminist ethics, and MacIntyre acknowledges his debt.] But the virtues of acknowledge dependence are not identical to the virtues (such as the empathy or patience) *of a care-giver*. Rather, they are virtues that arise in *relation* between the dependent and the care-giver. Dependence is, after all, as close to any of use as sickness, injury, or misfortune. The dependent needs certain virtues (gratitude is perhaps a good example) that the care-giver does not need, or needs differently. Independent rationality is rather the exception than the rule. So it is simply wrong-headed to magnify the virtues of independence out of proportion of those that are needed, in individuals and in a community, at the beginning and end of life, and also any disabling portion of life. \
\
To achieve the communal goal of producing independent reasoners requires a systemic web of virtues across the entire communal association. MacIntyre argues that \'93neither the modern state nor the modern family can supply that kind of political and social association that is needed.\'94[@macintyre1999dependent 9] Not only individual human beings, but entire communities, institutions, and nations need virtues to keep their integrity and to produce the next generation of independent, virtuous, rational animals. While *Dependent Rational Animals* is an exciting and fruitful book that deserves more attention, I must transition to explaining how it further helps protect against the charge of relativism. \
\
### Practical wisdom ###\
\
Our human nature as dependent practical reasoners demonstrates why prudence or *phronesis* is the master virtue. For *Phronesis* complements every other moral virtue. MacIntyre defends Aristotle\'92s conception of the practical syllogism. For example, *I ought to do (the courageous thing of) resisting a student\'92s attempt to bribe me for a higher grade. This student is attempting to bribe me for a higher grade. Therefore, in this case, I ought to do (the courageous thing of) resisting this student\'92s attempt to bribe me.* The major premise here is an evaluative judgment about a virtue or action-type; the minor premise is a factual judgment about a situation or action-token; the conclusion is a *maxim*. It is a judgment but not merely a judgment; it is  *an action*. Each piece of the practical syllogism is needed for the whole to function in practice. For without moral virtues, prudence may be knowledge of what one ought to do but it does not entail that one is in the habit of actually doing it. And, more crucially, without prudence, the moral virtues are simply skills -- skills that might be serviceable to bad ends. Without prudence, one might be skilled in achieving *what is not to be done*.\
\
The mastery of prudence over other virtues also unifies the other virtues. *Dependent Rational Animals* supplies a necessary unifying base for MacIntyre\'92s virtue theory in three ways: it unifies intellectual and moral virtues, unifies various moral virtues, and unifies the various stages of the narrative of *human* life. \
\
### Hursthouse on *Phronesis*\
\
> Aristotle makes a number of specific remarks about phronesis that are the subject of much scholarly debate, but the (related) modern concept is best understood by thinking of what the virtuous morally mature adult has that nice children, including nice adolescents, lack. Both the virtuous adult and the nice child have good intentions, but the child is much more prone to mess things up because he is ignorant of what he needs to know in order to do what he intends. A virtuous adult is not, of course, infallible and may also, on occasion, fail to do what she intended to do through lack of knowledge, but only on those occasions on which the lack of knowledge is not culpable ignorance. So, for example, children and adolescents often harm those they intend to benefit either because they do not know how to set about securing the benefit or, more importantly, because their understanding of what is beneficial and harmful is limited and often mistaken. Such ignorance in small children is rarely, if ever culpable, and frequently not in adolescents, but it usually is in adults. Adults are culpable if they mess things up by being thoughtless, insensitive, reckless, impulsive, shortsighted, and by assuming that what suits them will suit everyone instead of taking a more objective viewpoint. They are also, importantly, culpable if their understanding of what is beneficial and harmful is mistaken. It is part of practical wisdom to know how to secure real benefits effectively; those who have practical wisdom will not make the mistake of concealing the hurtful truth from the person who really needs to know it in the belief that they are benefiting him.\
>Quite generally, given that good intentions are intentions to act well or \'93do the right thing\'94, we may say that practical wisdom is the knowledge or understanding that enables its possessor, unlike the nice adolescents, to do just that, in any given situation. The detailed specification of what is involved in such knowledge or understanding has not yet appeared in the literature, but some aspects of it are becoming well known. Even many deontologists now stress the point that their action-guiding rules cannot, reliably, be applied correctly without practical wisdom, because correct application requires situational appreciation\'97the capacity to recognize, in any particular situation, those features of it that are morally salient. This brings out two aspects of practical wisdom.\
>One is that it characteristically comes only with experience of life. Amongst the morally relevant features of a situation may be the likely consequences, for the people involved, of a certain action, and this is something that adolescents are notoriously clueless about precisely because they are inexperienced. It is part of practical wisdom to be wise about human beings and human life. (It should go without saying that the virtuous are mindful of the consequences of possible actions. How could they fail to be reckless, thoughtless and short-sighted if they were not?)\
>The aspect that is more usually stressed regarding situational appreciation is the practically wise agent's capacity to recognize some features of a situation as more important than others, or indeed, in that situation, as the only relevant ones. The wise do not see things in the same way as the nice adolescents who, with their imperfect virtues, still tend to see the personally disadvantageous nature of a certain action as competing in importance with its honesty or benevolence or justice.\
>These aspects coalesce in the description of the practically wise as those who understand what is truly worthwhile, truly important, and thereby truly advantageous in life, who know, in short, how to live well. In the Aristotelian \'93eudaimonist\'94 tradition, this is expressed in the claim that they have a true grasp of eudaimonia.\
\
\
### Tradition-constituted rationality objections ###\
\
One family of objections pertain to the way MacIntyre's ethical theory appeals to tradition-constituted rationality. MacIntyre argues that we should return to the Aristotelian tradition of virtue and practical reason. We must beware one misunderstanding. Any talk of \'93returning\'94 is liable to sound nostalgic. At the risk of sounding paradoxical, we might put it this way: MacIntyre's positive ethical positions are *traditional* but not *nostalgic.* In fact, his definition of tradition is *progressive*.  Tradition is an ongoing, socially-embedded argument over time, which necessarily entails that moral enquiry is dynamic -- even *modern*. To be traditional is not to be past-oriented; to be traditional is to be staunchly future-oriented, since the business of life is not only the pursuit of our *telos* but the transmission of everything valuable and precious to the next generation. \
\
One critic who misunderstands MacIntyre along these lines is Martha Nussbaum.[@nussbaum1989recoiling] She begins her review of *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* with an age-old dilemma between the social stability afforded by tradition (with its danger of hidebound error) and the social volatility endemic to critical reflection (with its opportunity of progress toward truth). She alludes to this dilemma as articulated by Aristotle: \
\
>In the second book of the Politics, Aristotle asks whether it is a good thing to encourage changes in society. Should people be offered rewards for inventing some change in the traditional laws? No, he writes, because this would lead to instability and unnecessary tampering with what is working well. Should we, on the other hand, listen to those who wish to keep ancestral traditions fixed and immune from criticism? No again\'97for if we reason well we can make progress in lawmaking, just as we do in other arts and sciences.[@nussbaum1989recoiling]\
\
Aristotle\'92s solution is that it should be hard but not impossible to change societal structures. Of course, we don\'92t have to pick just one or the other. But, putting it starkly, of the two it is better to gamble for progress toward truth at the risk of instability than to gamble for stability at the risk hidebound error. Strangely, Nussbaum takes MacIntyre to be reversing Aristotle\'92s balance. She thinks MacIntyre is urging for betting on social stability even if it means sticking closer to existing tradition (and hence surpassing or intentionally avoiding critical reflection) than is compatible with unfettered progress.  \
\
This is not an objection to MacIntyre \'97 it is a misreading. He rejects fideism and this kind of conservative traditionalism. MacIntyre sides with Aristotle, in my view, that the risk of complacent error is greater than the risk of instability. For hidebound error is likely to perpetuate itself across generations, while the instability arising from a cacophony of disagreement is likely to be short-lived. Nussbaum does not see that MacIntyre's proposed solution is not a sort of *anti-progressive* longing for the past. It is radically progressive.  His solution is not to reverse progress but to replace the Enlightenment's standard of progress with a more tenable alternative. Ironically, it appears to me that Nussbaum is too conservative in her defense of the Enlightenment's standard of progress; MacIntyre is the progressive here. Rather than accusing MacIntyre of being too conservative, Nussbaum should focus on his critique of the Enlightenment. MacIntyre's critique may be wrong, but it is with that critique that she should take issue. She should not accuse him of failing to "make progress... [in] arts and sciences" but of "tampering with what is working well."\
\
\
MacIntyre's theory of rationality may be wrong, but it is not wrong along the lines that Nussbaum attacks. The other objections we must consider are that his concept of tradition-constituted rationality is incompatible with the very act of writing a book like *After Virtue*, or unhelpfully vague.\
\
First, is MacIntyre\'92s concept of tradition-constituted rationality even coherent? Suppose some traditions are truly incommensurable to each other, and that MacIntyre himself is truly situated within a tradition. It follows it is not possible to write a book (like *After Virtue*?) from a universal, objective, view-from-nowhere. But MacIntyre wrote such books and defending such theories. This amounts to a performative contradiction. \
\
Even if his concept is coherent,  is it *clear* enough to be an indispensable feature of an ethical theory? What constitutes a tradition? MacIntyre's examples sometimes lead us to believe that a tradition can be anything from a religion (Judaism) to a discipline (moral inquiry) to a philosophical school (Thomism). \
\
Once the concept of tradition is clarified, how can MacIntyre avoid the charge of relativism at this level? According to MacIntyre's account, members of traditions can leave their primary tradition after undergoing an epistemological crisis. Remember that varying traditions can disagree about a proposition P. Perhaps tradition A finds P true and B finds it false, on best evidence and sufficient reflection. But incommensurable traditions disagree about the standards (say, S1 and S2) by which to judge the truth and even the rationality of other traditions. So A finds P true and rational (by S1) while B finds P false and irrational (by S2). They genuinely disagree. And A judges B to be irrational (since they deny that P) while B returns the favor (since A affirms that P). \
\
Let's put these abstractions into an example. Consider Annabelle. Annabelle is a member of tradition A. Suppose that by A's standards of rationality, S1 contradictory propositions cannot both be true in the same sense. And suppose that A teaches that P. Finally, suppose that P entails both (Q and ~Q). Annabelle discovers a problem with her tradition. She cannot deny P nor can she affirm the contradiction. After some searching about, she concludes she cannot solve the problem and cannot even discover the rational resources with which to solve them. Being passingly familiar with tradition B, she becomes curious why her friends who belong to that tradition deny P and exercises her philosophical imagination to begin to see B "from within." Tradition B is compelling, since it denies that P. She "converts" traditions. However, there is a problem with tradition B, and that is that the standard of rationality of B (S2) allows its adherents to affirm a contradiction. So now, even though Annabelle left A to avoid having to affirm a contradiction (by her standard of rationality S1) now that she has joined B she no longer sees it as irrational to affirm the contradiction (by her new standard of rationality S2). This is surely an odd conclusion. \
\
A second variation on the same problem is this: how would a born-and-raised member of tradition B, affirming S2, ever come to epistemological crisis? Discontentment with contradictions is not available to B members *ex hypothesi*. They do not see affirming a contradiction as irrational. Their tradition can bear a hundred instances of (Q and ~Q).\
\
The odd conclusion of this thought experiment is a dilemma: either such nonsense is possible, or embracing the law of non-contradiction is a universal standard of rationality in every tradition. The latter option seems to indicate that traditions A and B are *not* actually incommensurable, since they share one rather substantial presupposition. The flow of members from one to the other is intelligible. The former option allows A and B to be incommensurable, but seems to freeze members in their own tradition. Members of A would have no (rational) justification for joining B, while members of B would have no (rational) justification for leaving B. So either all traditions are the same (in which case MacIntyre's definition is unclear) or some people are in principle locked in their own tradition (in which case one kind of relativism is final). \
\
While "tradition" and "tradition-constituted rationality" were supposed to solve the conundrums MacIntyre faced in his life and philosophical career, the cure may have been worse than the disease. \
\
### Discussion\
\
MacIntyre's denial of relativism boils down to two claims: the first is that even enquirers situated within a tradition can achieve *truth*, because truth is distinct from *rationality*; the second claim, which is related, is that enquirers can overcome the rational limitations of their tradition. \
\
\
#### Relative enquiry, absolute truth ###\
\
MacIntyre accepts -- indeed, argues for -- a certain truth within relativism. That truth is that every enquirer seeks the conclusion of the enquiry at a particular time and place, within a particular social setting, within a language, and within a tradition. Following Lutz, we can say that MacIntyre accepts \'93relativity\'94. Relativity (a term borrowed from Michael Krausz[@krausz1984relativism]) is a thesis about *the condition of enquiry.* It is not a thesis about the *conclusion of enquiry.* Lutz approves of Mark Colby's statement that "argumentative situatedness is inescapable."[@lutz2004tradition 89] However such relative situatedness is compatible with objective or absolute or mind-independent or tradition-independent *truth*. \
\
Returning to Rorty's claim, we can say that MacIntyre agrees that "nothing can be said about... rationality" except what is taken as rational in a given society and tradition; where he disagrees is in equating rationality with *truth.* From the historically- and socially-situated position of enquiry, a philosopher (he argues) may indeed find truth. It is impossible to achieve objective or absolute or tradition-independent *rationality* but it is possible -- indeed, it is the hope and *telos* of enquiry -- to achieve objective *truth.* This may seem a paradox. \
\
The primary kind of truth we seek in enquiry is "the adequation of the mind to reality."[@aquinas Q.16 and *De Veritate* Q.1, A.1-3. "Veritas est adaequatio rei et intellectus."] This is the understanding of truth inherent in the Aristotelian tradition.[^7]  Aristotle says, \'93To say of what is that it is not, or of what is not that it is, is false, while to say of what is that it is, and of what is not that it is not, is true."[@aristotle *Metaphysics* 1011b25]  Aquinas calls this the adequation of the intellect to the object.\
\
[^7]: On the correspondence theory of truth, Marian David says: "The main positive argument given by advocates of the correspondence theory of truth is its obviousness. Descartes: 'I have never had any doubts about truth, because it seems a notion so transcendentally clear that nobody can be ignorant of it...the word "truth", in the strict sense, denotes the conformity of thought with its object' (1639, AT II 597). Even philosophers whose overall views may well lead one to expect otherwise tend to agree. Kant: 'The nominal definition of truth, that it is the agreement of [a cognition] with its object, is assumed as granted' (1787, B82). William James: 'Truth, as any dictionary will tell you, is a property of certain of our ideas. It means their "agreement", as falsity means their disagreement, with "reality"'' (1907, p. 96). Indeed, The Oxford English Dictionary tells us: "Truth, n. Conformity with fact; agreement with reality'".\
\
However, 'truth' is ambiguous across at least two senses: a metaphysical, substantive sense and an epistemological, logical sense. The metaphysical sense of truth is simply reality. "Truth" is being itself. The logical sense of truth (which MacIntyre alludes to here) is the adequation of the intellect to those beings. Logical "truth" is knowing the (metaphysical) truth.[^18] \
\
[^18]: The third semantic sense of 'truth' would, naturally, be the accurate relation between the content of one's assertions and the beings about which one is making assertions. Semantic "truth" would be veridical statements about the metaphysical truth.\
\
If we understand MacIntyre to be arguing or assuming that (logical) truth is adequation of mind to reality, we can make sense of his endorsement of "relativity". Rationality is something more pragmatic than truth, something more like "warranted assertability."[@dewey1941propositions 169] That is, the theories we rationally construct are, for us, the "best theory so far".[@macintyre1988whose] It is no contradiction or paradox to assert that our rationality is the best thus far but that others in the future (or the past, or in rival traditions) might be *closer* to the truth. \
\
The second point is that enquirers from within various traditions can (and often do) come to realize that their tradition is incoherent by its own standards and from this epistemological crisis come to find the resources of a rival tradition superior to their own; Aristotelian (and specifically Thomist) moral enquiry is, he argues, more rationally justified than encyclopedic or genealogical enquiry *by their standards* and *by its own standards*.  \
\
In this way, MacIntyre escapes (one iteration) of the charge of relativism. The truth can be known from within the confines of our tradition and perspective. This answer, of course, puts pressure on his definition of "tradition." We shall return to this concern below. \
\
Another worry about relativism was this: Are there evil practices? If so, it seemed that MacIntyre's theory would allow "virtues" to serve wicked ends. The rebuttal to this charge depends on the unity of virtue. \
\
In *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?*, MacIntyre explicitly retracts his earlier belief that virtues exist without a unity under prudence.[@macintyre1988whose preface, p. x] The consequences of this retraction, Lutz argues, are crucial to refuting the charge of relativism. If virtues are unified, then even though virtues exist only in the context of practices, "no genuine practice can be inherently evil."[@lutz2004tradition 102] Rather, practical reason can judge *apparent goods* as genuine goods. The qualities needed for achieving the spurious goods internal to that "practice" would not be virtues but only *apparent virtues*. \
\
Now, such a definition certainly seems ad hoc. But Lutz provides a persuasive illustration: eugenics. Eugenics certainly seems to bear the markings of a genuine practice. Its apparent good is the purification of the gene pool for future generations. However, genuine virtues militate *against* the achievement of that goal. For example, Lutz cites a story of a doctor who had the virtue of compassion found himself unable to pursue the program of euthanizing mentally-disabled children.[@poliakov1979harvest 186-7] We might also recall Huck Finn's internal struggle with his "conscience" in Twain's *Adventures of Huckleberry Finn*. Huck decides to turn Jim in to the slave owners. He writes a letter outing Jim, and says: "I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I had ever felt so in my life, and I knowed I could pray now." Yet for all that, after vividly confronting Jim's humanity and goodness, he feels the loyalty of their friendship and wavers:\
\
>It was a difficult situation. I picked up the letter, and held it in my hand. I was trembling, because I knew had to make a choice between two things, and the outcome of my decision would last forever. I thought about it a minute while I held my breath. And then I said to myself: \'93All right, then, I\'92ll GO to hell"\'97and tore it up.[@twain2014adventures,Chapter 31] \
\
The humor of this passage arises, in large part, because of the tension between the *apparent good* of treating Jim as legal property and the *actual good* of treating Jim as an end in himself, as a free man just like any other. Huck's virtue (in this case, loyalty or friendship) *cannot* be put to use in the service of a corrupting practice like slave-trading. Just as vice subverts institutions and their worthy practices, virtue "subverts" vicious institutions and unworthy practices. Virtue marks the difference between the coward who disobeys his commanding officer's orders because the obedience would put him at risk of painful death and the courageous person who disobeys his commanding officer's order because obedience would require wrongdoing. Without prudence to discriminate between the two cases, we lack any resources by which to discriminate courage and cowardice, between a virtuous resistance and vicious resistance. \
\
Some might worry that the distinction between apparent goods and actual goods brings with it more problems than it solves. It is certainly a distinction that leaves many questions unanswered. My first reply is that such a distinction is inevitable and necessary in our practical reasoning. Assume for a reductio that "there is no real distinction between apparent and real goods." Then either *nothing* is "actually good" (everything that appears good is just an apparent good) or that *nothing* is "actually bad though it appears good" (everything that appears good is a real good). But I take it as axiomatic and irrefutable that some things are actually good (life, pleasure, happiness, friendship). And some things that appear good are not good: obeying unjust laws, enjoying the misfortune of an enemy, etc.  Therefore there is a real distinction between apparent and real goods. \
\
A second reply, however, requires conceding that MacIntyre's theory leaves us unsatisfied. That is, it might be that the unsatisfying aspects of his theory track those aspects of morality that are unsatisfying. The admitted indeterminacy of MacIntyre's account reflects the real indeterminacy of our moral lives. Consider two phenomena: some individuals and cultures persist in behaviors (that I believe) are wicked and unjustifiable -- slavery, child prostitution, ritual human sacrifice, or what have you. It needs to be explained, from within my tradition, how it could be that otherwise decent and normal human beings could persist in such vileness. The other phenomena is this: some individuals and cultures repent and change (what I believe are) their wicked ways. Some make moral progress. The paradox is that while we cannot expect magical linear moral progression from wicked to good everywhere, neither can we despair of any person or culture making moral progress. It just seems a brute datum of observation that some are stubbornly stuck in their wicked ways, and some are admirably firm in their benevolent resolve. How do we explain this paradoxical phenomenon? \
\
MacIntyre's account offers an explanation of why vices sometimes persist within pseudo-practices, institutions, and traditions from generation to generation; on the other hand, it explains why practice-enabling virtues sometimes emerge to disrupt a pseudo-practice, a wicked institution, and a corrupt or at least incomplete tradition. The fact is that "many kinds of activities can be, and in fact are considered to be, practices. Some of these may conflict radically, owing to errors and insufficiencies in rationality."[@lutz2004tradition 103] Errors in rationality explain errors in traditions and hence false ascriptions of the title 'virtue.' Rationality answers to truth, to the world as it is, not merely to the pragmatic  truth to "dialectical success."[@lutz2004tradition 104] Hence, virtues answer to *what is really good*. They do not merely answer to "what-counts-as-good-for-us", which property is relative to each tradition. \
\
In this way, MacIntyre escapes this iteration of the charge of relativism, while still explaining why rival traditions differ -- and sometimes radically differ -- in their evaluations and opinions. Incomplete traditions can, and do, undergo crisis. Particular persons within that tradition discover and asseverate on inadequacies within the tradition, leading to an epistemological crisis. In response, others within the same tradition may become willing to examine the resources of rival traditions and either quit their primary tradition or re-fashion it, re-make it, update it, and make real moral and intellectual progress. \
\
\
### The consistency of tradition-constituted rationality ###\
\
MacIntyre would have us believe that 'rationality' is not a disembodied set of timeless and universal procedures of thinking. My rationality includes whatever standards of reasoning I accept, and all the other resources (facts, authorities, memories) I use to judge true and false. I already responded to worries presented above about whether rationalities are ultimately incommensurable. The fact that people can, and do, identify inconsistencies with their own tradition, identify the resources of rival traditions, and switch traditions. \
\
Even after clarifying MacIntyre's optimism about the possibility of ethical truth, his answer to relativism is sufficient but still somehow indeterminate. This indeterminacy is partly due, as I have suggested, to his appeal to practical rationality. While this appeal seems to me to solve some problems, there is one lingering problem it does not solve.  From my perspective (or my tradition), *every legitimate tradition* affirms the law of non-contradiction. But that is just to say that if Walt Whitman or Nagarjuna denies the law  of non contradiction, then I will necessarily judge them to be irrational.[@sepcontradiction. "Do I contradict myself? / Very well, then, I contradict myself. / (I am large, I contain multitudes.)  (Walt Whitman, \'93Song of Myself\'94); "Everything is real and not real. / Both real and not real. / Neither real nor not real. / That is Lord Buddha's teaching." (M\uc0\u363 la-madhyamaka-k\u257 rik\u257  18:8), quoted in Garfield (1995: 102)]  But I wish to go further and say that this strand of Buddhism *really is irrational*. That is, I wish to affirm that they are irrational -- full stop. I am not sure MacIntyre's theory allows me to affirm that. Unless I am missing something crucial here, this seems to me a limitation of the theory. \
\
Perhaps a qualified acceptance of MacIntyre's claim about tradition-constituted rationality is that when a tradition does not *seem* share this standard of rationality (the value of logical consistency) I should not be too quick to judge that I have really understood their meaning. Perhaps when I ask them if they affirm (S is P and S is not P) they have a slightly different concept in mind for "not" or for "and." Or perhaps they are speaking of an entity instantiating a property and not instantiating that same property at the same time but in ever so slightly different respects. Walt Whitman may be saying he contradicts himself in ever so slightly different respects in order to grasp apparently paradoxical truths that can be predicated of a transcendental modern man. Or perhaps they are denying both P and not P in favor of some other, different articulation of the predicates a given subject instantiates. In the case of any of these alternatives, the principle of charity recommends I extend my interlocutor the benefit of the doubt before concluding that the appearance of irrationality reflects real irrationality. \
\
### The clarity of tradition-constituted rationality\
\
What exactly is a tradition? MacIntyre's account is not clear. John Haldane (among others) questions MacIntyre\'92s ability coherently to identify what a tradition is. What is tradition A? How do we differentiate it from B? Are two traditions separate and hence identifiable only if they are *incommensurable*? How much difference constitutes separation? How much overlap is compatible with difference? Jewish and Christian traditions share a common origin and bear considerable overlap in authorities, scriptures, and doctrines. \
\
MacIntyre\'92s definition makes answering these questions difficult. He characterizes a tradition as "separate and unified when its members or texts have a core set of shared commitments to beliefs, when the tradition is situated in a particular context in a particular set of institutions and when the tradition has an identifiable linguistic difference when compared to other traditions.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 83] But is there any universal procedure for identifying such linguistic and institutional differences? \
\
The right response to this call for clarification, I think, comes from Weinstein. We should not expect, by MacIntyre\'92s lights, that there is an automatically objective, view-from-nowhere by which we can define tradition itself. Rather, MacIntyre concludes that \'93the concept of a tradition, together with the criteria for its use and application, is itself one developed from within one particular tradition-based standpoint. This does not preclude its application to the very tradition within which it was developed.\'94[@horton1994after 295]  MacIntyre grants that his self-definition of his own tradition arises, in part, from his criteria of that tradition. Traditions change over time. They progress (according to their own unchanging standards) toward unchanging goals or else they abandon old standards. This is liable to frustrate some readers. But the alternative is worse. The alternative is a denial of pluralism that liberalism holds dear. For it is intellectual imperialism to assume that I have the *real* scoop on every other tradition. It assumes I have the right to define and critique all other traditions *in my own terms.* Even though MacIntyre thinks his own tradition correct, and others incorrect, this is not imperialistic. For he is willing to reflect on his own tradition, examine its resources and inadequacies, and engage through philosophical imagination with rivals. \
\
In short, by MacIntyre's lights he does not need a definition of tradition that is any more cut and dry than it is. Forcefully to disagree with this conclusion requires his interlocutor to produce an alternative theory of practical rationality. But that alternative will either aim to be *not* tradition-constituted but universal (which is the encyclopedic tradition) or it will admit is tradition-constituted but the "best so far" (which is MacIntyre's own view). \
\
We can think of this worry about MacIntyre's theory more generally as a problem of thinking about thinking. MacIntyre is a theorist of virtue and practical rationality. Hence rationally to assess his theory requires thinking through our own theory of rationality. The errors we make in *thinking things through* are not likely to be solved by *thinking them through*. The Greek proverb is: \'93If water chokes us, what shall we drink?\'94 The Latin proverb (from a very different context) is \'93Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?\'94 \'97 who will guard the guards themselves? I believe the answer to the rhetorical question is *no one at all* can guard the guards; if water chokes us, there is *nothing at all we can drink to wash it down*. Likewise, if something is deeply wrong with the way we think, how can theorizing about rationality right the wrong? \
\
Some of the errors MacIntyre diagnoses in thinkers who belong to encyclopedic tradition will be invisible to those thinkers unless they themselves earnestly examine the problems of the tradition. Even if MacIntyre\'92s diagnosis is *correct* -- especially if it is correct -- the readers who especially need to hear it will find the diagnosis unintelligible, even irrational. Insofar as the "patient" finds any parts of his theory intelligible, they will seem radical, disastrous in their social implications, and destructive of the very nature and purpose of education. The reason these appearances will be insuperable to MacIntyre\'92s patient is because the patient is, by his lights, self-deceived. He or she simply denies being part of a tradition, and hence denies having a particular (rather than universal) tradition-bound conception of rationality, and hence denies having a particular, tradition-bound conception of the good (perhaps the good is unbounded freedom to follow the moral law, or to pursue happiness,, and justice unfettered equality). Modernity is the \'93tradition-less tradition\'94 and hence *must* deny tradition to be consistent with itself. \
\
The solution to this paradox is not to browbeat people into admitting that they inhabit a tradition. Rather, he directs the arguments (of *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?*) and others at interlocutors who are already undergoing epistemological crisis. This "patient" comes to MacIntyre with manifesting symptoms. MacIntyre offers one possible diagnosis, and the patient's job is to investigate further. The patient needs philosophical imagination to even *consider* the possibility of another truth. The patient needs patience, intellectual courage, and self-reflection. The patient needs to sit in front of the proverbial mirror and mouth the words, (a) \'93I am part of a tradition\'94 and (b) \'93my tradition might be inadequate,\'94 and (c) \'93that other tradition might have the resources more adequately to address the intellectual and practical problems that I now see are insuperable to my tradition.\'94 The critic who would escape the battery is more likely to flee rather than engage; but the critic who would escape by engaging and overcoming is liable to meet her match. \
\
### The justification of morality by tradition-constituted rationality ###\
\
A third reply is in order here.  D'andrea[@dandrea2006tradition] points out a critique Philippa Foot has leveled against MacIntyre: after all the informative and wide-ranging historical analysis, MacIntyre\'92s account does not solve the \'93problem posed by Plato, and never solved \'85 that of showing the rationality, for any man, of a thorough-going acceptance of the restraints of justice.\'94[@foot1981. This is the \'93problem of immoralism\'94 she tries to address in the final chapter of her *Natural Goodness*.] The challenge of a Nietzsche or Callicles or Thrasymachus lies in their acceptance that the good life for humans *requires* some virtues or requires virtue in some sense but their rejection of the \'93robust concept of justice with its corresponding constraints on action.\'94[@dandrea2006tradition 430]\
\
One response is this: the question \'93why be moral?\'94 is never asked in the abstract. For example, in describing the "self of the heroic age" MacIntyre says, \'93In heroic society there is no 'outside' except that of the stranger. A man who tried to withdraw himself from his given position in heroic society would be engaged in the enterprise of trying to make himself disappear.\'94[@macintyre1984after 126] Even though virtues in twenty-first century North America are not what the same as Homer's day, there is a parallel to be drawn. \
\
Philosophers often ask \'93why be moral?\'94 hypothetically. They ask it *as if* speaking on the skeptic's behalf, or as if *they* were skeptics. But hypothetical moral skeptics will not do. We must consider a concrete character, real or fictional. Once we look for a real or fictional skeptic, a problem arises. By MacIntyre's lights, sincere \'93why be moral?\'94 skeptics are political or social outcasts. For millions of people who are full-fledged members of their tradition, the \'93why be moral?\'94 question will not usually arise. Parents, teachers, religious leaders, politicians, businesses, and non-profit organizations all have a hand in giving each member of the community the tradition out of which the community arises and within which abstract philosophical or pseudo-philosophical worries such as \'93What does it all mean?\'94 do not arise because they are satisfactorily answered.\
\
By contrast, the emergence of the doubt as to whether one should be moral, and the crystallization of the doubt into an articulate challenge, is *a political failure*. The *polis* to which the moral skeptic belongs has failed him. The moral skeptic, likewise, has failed the *polis* which belongs to him or her. So MacIntyre's theory makes room for people who are not actually skeptical (to whom an answer to Foot's challenge is not required) and people who are actually skeptical but do not belong to their society (to whom an answer to Foot's challenge would be meaningless).\
\
MacIntyre's theory makes room for one more group: moral skeptics *are* members of their own tradition but are seeing the problems within their own tradition and who are troubled by a \'93border tradition\'94. This type of skeptic sees the resources of a rival tradition and compares such favorably with the resources of his own tradition. The skeptic is, in a word, entering epistemological crisis. \
\
Specifically, it might be that the moral skeptic has been raised outside of the Aristotelian tradition and is noticing the inadequacies of his or her own tradition, and is entering epistemological crisis. MacIntyre's response is to invite him or her to do the hard work of resolving that crisis by examining, from within the context of a primary tradition *and* a \'93second first\'94 tradition, the problems at hand and the available solutions, working toward an ever greater understanding of the truth. \
\
In short, MacIntyre's theory gives an account of two contradictory phenomena. It explains how a moral skeptic might arise within a community and how that skeptic might be moved to a more adequate grasp of the truth; and it explains why, in healthy, unified, moral societies, *so few people become moral skeptics*.\
\
## 9. Is practical reason 'natural'?\
\
Although it seems practical reason is not natural, it is part of human nature (whether as endemic to human *nature*, not merely second nature, not necessarily supernatural, but primary nature because primary nature is logical or rational will be addressed later)\
\
\
\
## Conclusion\
\
My view is that practical reason is the general human capacity for deciding, through reflection and sensitivity to practical principles, what to do, and for evaluating one's own actions and those of others. Although we can by verbal sleight of hand define practical reasons as 'desires', the judgment of what to do is a distinct mental state from desiring, wanting, wishing, or instinctual attraction. Hence, practical reasons can (and most often do) motivate, all by themselves, even in the absence of desires (etc.); however, desires can (and often do) function as reasons for action. \
\
There are many reasons for action. But the concept of a reason for action is the concept of pursuing what is good or what is best, all things considered. Practical reason runs into quandaries because there are so many reasons for action, and they sometimes conflict.  Some have to do with what is best for me, what is best for others, what is best for me and what is best for me later, what is permissable and what is required, etc. Although we may want to reserve the word 'moral' for other-regarding reasons, it is important to keep in mind that our goal of living well demands sensitivity to a whole range of reasons, regarding self, other, world, and (perhaps) God. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
#Chapter on Telos: Virtue as Partly Constituting the Realization of our Natural, Human Telos\
\
## Introduction \
 \
**Thesis:** Virtue partially constitutes human flourishing (the realization of our human telos); there is a human telos, and virtue partially constitutes it. It *only partially* constitutes it.\
\
**A quote**:  *\'93What use would it be if a man had the wisdom of Nestor and wanted the necessaries of life, food and drink and clothes and the like? Where would be the advantage of wisdom then?\'94 Eryxias, in the dialogue Eryxias (attributed to Plato)*\
\
### The problems addressed in this chapter\
\
The theme if our present chapter is to puzzle through one of the most difficult ethical questions: why be good? If the conclusions from the previous inquiry were on the mark, then we can rephrase this question without a change of meaning: why is virtue (especially practical wisdom) necessary for human flourishing? This is the same question, since, \'93virtue\'94 (especially practical wisdom) is what *good* is for creatures like us; and \'93human flourishing\'94 is  a name for, ex hypothesis, that indeterminate concept of the one thing worth pursuing. The question \'93why be good?\'94 or \'93why be virtuous?\'94 should not be taken as the irrational question in the vicinity: \'93why do anything at all? Why be motivate?\'94 Such a question is practical irrationality unadulterated, as we saw with Melville\'92s Bartleby. The preference not to do anything \'97 or the lack of preference to do anything \'97 is inhuman \'93madness\'94 or mental illness. \
\
>Now this can easily be made to seem a strange worry. The thought that virtue is sufficient for happiness or flourishing is apt to produce Aristotle\'92s response: you can\'92t be serious. But if you accept that a flourishing life isn\'92t just one in which you have lots of stuff, or one in which you get success by any means \'96 if, that is, you accept that wicked or selfish people do not in fact flourish, so that only those who live virtuously have a chance of flourishing \'96 then a problem does emerge as to why virtue is not sufficient for flourishing. For it is up to me whether I live virtuously, or at least try to, but Aristotelian theories accept that even if I do the best I can I may still be deprived of happiness by factors that are beyond my control. For Aristotle, happiness is a hybrid combination of living virtuously and of achieving a measure of success in worldly terms. The latter is not under my control, and cannot be guaranteed.[Annas, "Virtue Ethics: What Kind of Naturalism?" in @gardiner2005virtue]\
\
\
### The importance of telos\
\
That teleology is important has been one of the central contentions of this dissertation. \
\
### Three characters, one successful, one virtuous, one both successful and virtuous\
\
The first character I should like to keep before our imagination is the Successful Man: wealthy, powerful, influential, well-connected, owning lots of land, designer clothes, and jets. This is Bruce Wayne, Donald Trump, or Hilary Clinton. We can playfully imagine them furthermore in the peak of life in beauty, health, and vigor. Whether or not this person is virtuous seems to be beside the point: they are Successful. They may not be wise but they enjoy the richness of the \'93aesthetic life.\'94\
\
The second character is the Scrappy Sage: even though these wise, unyielding in principle, scrupulous, discerning, practical, reliable,  beneficent, large-minded, generous, unflappable, just, undeceived and undeceivable, undistracted by petty pleasures, and far-sighted regarding the affairs of this life. This is Diogenes, Symeon Stylites, or John the Baptist who were despised for their lack of Success but admired and sought out for their Sagacity. They are ascetic sages but rejecting the aesthetic and embracing the \'93ethical life.\'94 \
\
The third is a combination of worldly success and virtuous sagacity: wealthy but wise, powerful but unyielding in principle, influential but scrupulous, well-connected by discerning, full of possessions but practical. This is King Solomon, Cato the Younger, or St. Katherine of Sienna. \
\
The question \'91why be good?\'92 is asked by someone who is earnestly in doubt as to whether it is better to be more like Solomon or St. Katherine than like Donald Trump or Hilary Clinton. They might agree that virtue and success together are better than virtue and no success; they are earnestly in doubt as to whether it would be better to have success without virtue or virtue without success. So the question \'93why be good?\'94 is not the question \'93Why be motivated at all?\'94 but \'93why not be motivated, after all, by success with or without virtue?\'92. \
\
This question is echoed by Eryxias: even supposing someone were as wise as Nestor, wouldn\'92t such a person be miserable without food and drink and clothes and the like? What *advantage* is wisdom? The assumption here is that the meaning of  \'93advantage\'94 is advantage for *us* here and now, not just abstract admirable qualities. \
\
If virtues is partly constitutive of flourishing (even \'93success\'94), then the question \'91why be virtuous?\'92 is close \'97 if not identical \'97 to the irrational question \'91why do what is worth doing?\'92. It is a conceptual confusion. However, if virtue is not constitutive of flourishing, then the question of whether *I* really ought to let virtue be the over overriding practical consideration instead of the alluring temptations of wealth, riches, sex, and power in however great of quantities I can achieve. \
\
So my first thesis in this chapter, is this: virtue causes human flourishing but also partly constitutes it. This is my first step toward solving the problem of why be good. \
\
Many neo-Aristotelians use \'93flourishing\'94 to translate the untranslatable \'93eudaimonia.\'94 Eudaimonia is the human *telos*. *Telos* is, of course, Greek for "end". The word is bursting with dizzying array of possible meanings, including "definite point", "goal", "purpose," "cessation," "order," "prize," "highest point", "realization", "decision", and "services."[@liddell1896intermediate compare with Strong's 5056: "telos tel'-os from a primary tello (to set out for a definite point or goal); properly, the point aimed at as a limit, i.e. (by implication) the conclusion of an act or state (termination (literally, figuratively or indefinitely), result (immediate, ultimate or prophetic), purpose); specially, an impost or levy (as paid); continual, custom, end(-ing), finally, uttermost."] There are at least two kinds of teleology we can distinguish between: natural and social.[@barham2011] Natural teleology is not *intentional*. Social teleology is. The type of teleology the Aristotelian tradition takes for granted is natural teleology, of which social teleology is an instance in human rational creatures. \
\
So our telos is eudaimonia. What is eudaimonia? Answering this question is treacherously difficult. \'93Religious\'94 pagans like Aristotle thought it was the intellectual life of an (Athenian) gentlemen. Christians like Aquinas think it is the beatific vision of God after this life is over, including the time after a bodily resurrection. Atheists and other noble secularists such as Russell and Murdoch think that eudaimonia is a particular kind of virtuous and wise life here and now, despite the coming darkness. (Less noble secularists opt for cocaine, sex, whisky, heroine.) These are different reactions, but both are reactions to formalized despair. On a happier note, or perhaps equally anxious note, Ray Kurzweil and other transhumanists think that even this life can be extended, perhaps a little, perhaps a lot, which would afford more time to explore just what eudaimonia might be. I do not here bother to mention theories of reincarnation Is there any way to coordinate these views? \
\
Virtues play some important part in happiness, unless the immoralist consents to the despairing notion that if death ends all, then life is meaningless and so eat drink and be merry. \
\
The old Stoic line was the noble belief that virtue is *all* of eudaimonia. There is nothing more to be desired but virtue; \'93virtue is it\'92s own reward.\'94 The Aristotelian line was, not surprisingly, a bit more human. The life of virtuous activity is necessary but not sufficient for eudaimonia. Also needed are money, friends, and some good fortune. In a sense, the fully virtuous man or woman could be a victim to the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune and lose all. But this is just a way of saying that tragedies can indeed happen. Socrates would, with superhuman stubbornness, deny it. *Nothing* can harm the good man; and nothing save the bad one.\
\
### Minimal and Maximal Conceptions\
\
I would also like to distinguish between minimal conceptions and maximal conceptions of happiness. A minimal conception includes a necessary condition or set of necessary conditions the absence of which plausible constitutes *misery*. Peter Geach alludes to this kind of conception when he argues that only a broad basis of ethical agreement is needed for two groups to work together on building a hospital or running a university.[@geach1977virtues] Alasdair MacIntyre\'92s conception of telos in *After Virtue* is what I have called \'93minimal\'94. A maximal conception of happiness is more imaginative, certainly, but more divisive. A maximal conception imagines what state of affairs or what human activity constitutes *full and completely satisfying human life* \'97 fulfillment to the highest imaginable degree. Boethius pretty clearly aims for this kind of conception when he argues that the good of man is complete self-sufficiency and hence cannot but any \'93false happiness\'94 such as wealth, power, or pleasure but must be participation in God himself.^[*Consolation of Philosophy*, Book III.] \
\
Natural law theorists like to talk about \'91perfections\'92 of nature, and happiness as \'91perfect\'92 or complete. I prefer the term \'91maximal\'92 to \'91perfective\'92 for two reasons. First, the concept of maximum is relative to circumstances; one should aim to be as happy as possible *given the limitations of time*. This clause includes theist and atheists in the conversation since they may disagree on just what the limitations of time are but agree that we should aim to be as happy as possible. Secondly, the notion of perfection implies that human nature has natural limits of happiness, a terminus. I\'92m not sure this is true. It might be that, so long as one lives well, and so long as the average lifespan of western industrial peoples continues to increase. Is there a natural limit, for instance, to how many languages one can learn? I know three languages. With enough time before my biological end, couldn\'92t I learn ten? Someone more gifted with languages already knows ten and could learn twenty. If they lived 200 years, couldn\'92t they learn thirty languages? Is there a natural limit to wisdom? Can one become fully wise and then stop? Continuing the discussion using the notion of relative maximum keeps the case open on this issue. \
\
\
## MacIntyre\
\
### *After Virtue*\
\
MacIntyre is retiring and coy about what he thinks our telos might be. All he will say is the minimal definition: we ought to be free to pursue our telos. Virtue enables this. What more our telos might consist in I do not know that he cares to speculate. \
\
### *Dependent Rational Animals*\
\
*Dependent Rational Animals* is a more ambitious book in some respects. MacIntyre aims to build a broader account of virtues by attending to not only our independence but our dependence. Much of our dependence on each other stems from our animality: periods of gestation, infancy, old age, and illness all make us dependent on our fellow creatures. \
\
\
### *Telos* ###\
\
John Horton and Susan Mendus summarize the contrast the two understandings of the self well enough to quote them in full:\
\
>Where Aristotle understood man as a creature with a definite function which he might fulfill or deny, modern morality sees man simply as a rational agent who has no true or definable purpose independent of his own will... By appealing to a *telos*, Aristotle was able to distinguish between the way we actually are and the way we should be. His conception of human beings as having a specific *telos* brought with it the possibility that we might fall short of the ideal... But with the rejection of Aristotelianism gain the rejection of any such distinction between what we are and what we should be. Post-Enlightenment man is seen as governed, not by a *telos* external to him, but simply by the dictates of his own inner reason... Thus the abandonment of an Aristotelian conception of the good has not only left us without standards by which to evaluate our moral arguments, it is also cast us adrift in the moral world. For Aristotle, a conception of the good for man has an essentially societal dimension.[@horton2015 6]  \
\
For MacIntyre, the loss of *telos*  is one of the chief if not the chief error of Enlightenment moralities. He explains why in his discussion of the three elements of morality.[@macintyre1984after 54ff] The first element is "untutored human nature" (as it is). The second element is human nature (as it could be, should be). The third element is the set of properties needed to move from the first to the second points. Moral rules or admirable character traits are the content of morality; but the *telos* of humanity is the context of morality. It quite literally makes the content of morality make sense. Understanding "human-nature-as-it-is"[@macintyre1984after 55] is a task for philosophers, as well as psychologists, sociologists, anthropologists, etc. Understanding human nature "man-as-he-could-be-if-he-realized-his-*telos*"[@macintyre1984after 55] was "the whole point of ethics."  It is difficult to understate the importance of this point about the self and its relation to not only virtue theory but ethical theory itself. Edward Oakes describes the removal of *telos* from our worldview as \'93perhaps the greatest category mistake ever made in the history of philosophy.\'94\
\
>That word \'93teleological\'94 is the key to MacIntyre\'92s solution, the loss of which is the cause of the catastrophe described in his science-fiction parable. Teleology is the study of final causes, goals, purposes, and aims: a style of explanation that saturates Aristotle\'92s philosophy. After the combined impact of Newton and Darwin, however, this type of explanation seems mostly 'quaint' and once Aristotle\'92s science seemed quaint, his ethics soon followed: when Newton demonstrated how motion can be better explained as resulting from the outcome of mechanical laws, and when Darwin posited natural selection as the \'93mechanism\'94 for explaining an organ\'92s functionality, the use of teleology in ethics was doomed...Emptying moral discourse of teleological concepts because of the perceived impact of Newton and Darwin has been for MacIntyre the catastrophe of our times.[@oakes1996] \
\
Now, MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue is \'93neo-Aristotelian\'94 in that it borrows from but also contrast with Aristotle\'92s. For instance, MacIntyre denies that Aristotle\'92s virtues are so timeless, abstract, and generically human as Aristotle would make them appear; they are partly indexed to fourth century, upper-class, educated Athenian culture. He also rejects Aristotle's metaphysics of nature. Nevertheless, he argues, the loss of a concept of *telos* is dramatic.  MacIntyre's provisional conception of our human *telos* is this:  \'93The good life for man is the life spent in seeking for the good life for man, and the virtues necessary for the seeking are those which will enable us to understand what more and what else the good life for man is."[@macintyre1984after 210] Our *telos* is to be free to pursue our *telos*. MacIntyre is not a straightforward eudaemonist; this conception of the human *telos* is more vague than Aristotle's. Whatever the human *telos* turns out to be, it minimally includes the freedom to explore "what else" the *telos* might be. \
\
      I defer a full discussion of teleology until the next section. \
\
For now, it is not vacuous to conclude that the virtues needed to achieve this (extremely indeterminate) goal themselves indirectly make room for and might directly illumine \'93what else\'94 our *telos* consists in. The virtues needed to preserve the quest for the good, he suggests, may illumine \'93what else\'94 our *telos* consists in. It may turn out (and his later writings are more explicit about it) that the determinate *telos* of a given tradition is a more determinate conception of eudaimonia. \
\
\
### *Telos* objections###\
\
One family of objections pertains to teleology. If MacIntyre's suggestion that we need to recover the Aristotelian tradition of the virtues is to be taken as a serious plan, then we must recover *telos*, for without a clear *telos* even a high moral earnestness attached to virtues devolves into an unintelligible set of rules or traditions. Virtue without *telos* literally has no point.[^16] This constellation of objections is, I think, most potentially disastrous for MacIntyre's theory, and the objections are powerful.[^15] \
\
[^15]: Yet in addition to the real philosophical difficulty of the matter, the prejudices and misconceptions surrounding teleology are so thick one would need several chapters to dig through the muck and mire. I think an adequate response can, ultimately, be made. \
\
[^16]:A society that enforces chaste behavior and honors chastity as a virtue but does so without any understanding of how such chastity fits into the fulfilled life of a fully virtuous human being and a fully virtuous community will be open to the criticism that such behaviors and virtues are prohibiting a whole range of pleasurable activities.\
\
In this section I shall present three objections from teleology that are especially problematic for MacIntyre's narrative. The first objection regarding teleology is to deny MacIntyre's historical narrative. Oakes above eloquently summarized MacIntyre's criticism of  the loss of *telos* in modern moral philosophy, natural science, psychology, and ethics. But perhaps modern moral philosophy is not so anti-teleological as all that. Kant's categorical imperative, much vaunted for its austere duty for the sake of duty, is actually aimed at perfection.[@ward1971kant] Keith Ward argued with some impatience almost 40 years ago (10 years before *After Virtue*'s first edition) that Kant should not be interpreted as commending duty as some abstract, context-free obligation. He says: \
\
>Kant's position is not merely that one must conceive oneself as setting up a purposive order of Nature, according to universal laws, as though one could arbitrarily choose anything whatsoever as one's purpose. One can see this if one takes Kant's list of examples of moral duties in the *Metaphysic of Morals* [sic]. Masturbation is against the *purposes of Nature*, in forming the sexual organs; suicide contravenes *Nature's purpose* in establishing self-love in order to preserve life... Finally, "holiness of will" must be pursued, as this expresses the absolute worth of the human person, in its freedom from sensuous impulses and its transcendence of Nature.[@ward1971kant 341] \
\
These quotes from the allegedly dour-faced deontologist certainly sound awfully similar to Aristotle (not to mention St. Paul). Along similar lines, Kantian ethicist David Cummiskey has argued that Kant can be understood as a consequentialist of sorts.[@cummiskey1996kantian] The proposal is that Kant's *justification* for moral normative principles was a brute, formal, categorical imperative, but the *content* of such normative principles included agents and the goods they aim to attain. Happiness can be valued as an imperfect duty, though rational agency must be valued as a perfect duty. Without entering into all the interesting details at this juncture, the thought is that perhaps a (thoroughly modern) moral philosophy like deontology can be synthesized with natural teleology. \
\
The other putatively modern moral philosophy that comes in for criticism for MacIntyre, Anscombe, et. al., is Mill's utilitarianism. But isn't consequentialism teleological in the proper sense of *telos*. Clearly, consequences are *ends* of actions -- I go to work *in order to* earn a paycheck at the end of the month; the consequence (my paycheck) is the goal or purpose or point of the action (going to work). For consequentialism, the great intrinsic value is happiness, or pleasure. On the surface, this sounds like a kind of Aristotelian eudaimonism. But Aristotle's eudaimonia is the necessary end of all action and all practical reasoning. The proof that we pursue eudaimonia (something vague) is as robust as the proof that we pursue *anything at all*.[@aristotle Book I.1] Similarly, all that Mill can say to the enquirer who wants to hear about *why* happiness is desirable is that people desire it.[@mill chapter 4. *Of what sort of Proof the Principle of Utility is Susceptible*. He says, "The only proof capable of being given that an object is visible, is that people actually see it. The only proof that a sound is audible, is that people hear it: and so of the other sources of our experience. In like manner, I apprehend, the sole evidence it is possible to produce that anything is desirable, is that people do actually desire it. If the end which the utilitarian doctrine proposes to itself were not, in theory and in practice, acknowledged to be an end, nothing could ever convince any person that it was so. No reason can be given why the general happiness is desirable, except that each person, so far as he believes it to be attainable, desires his own happiness."] So perhaps virtue ethics can be synthesized with consequentialism. \
\
\
A second objection regarding teleology grants MacIntyre's pessimistic narrative. Ethics can get along well enough without intrinsic *teloi*. We cannot accept natural teleology since this notion has been exorcised from natural science (and from all rational philosophy) by Darwin and Newton. Bernard Williams summarizes this feeling well: \
\
>It seems to me that a correct understanding of evolution is relevant to projects of this kind, but that the effect of that understanding is largely discouraging to them... the idea of a naturalistic ethics was born of a deeply teleological outlook, and its best expression, in many ways, is to be found in Aristotle's philosophy, a philosophy according to which there is inherent in each natural kind of thing an appropriate way for things of that kind to behave... The first and hardest lesson of Darwinism, that there is no such teleology at all, and that there is no orchestral score provided from anywhere according to which human beings have a special part to play, still has to find its way fully into ethical thought.[@williams1995making]\
\
Williams' objection is a general objection from metaphysical naturalism to *any* form of naturalistic ethics. Rosalind Hursthouse says that, "From early on, Williams has expressed pessimism about the project of Aristotelian naturalism on the grounds that Aristotle's conception of nature, and thereby human nature, was normative, and that, in a scientific age, this is not a conception that we can take on board."[@hursthouse1998 256] His objection is ostensibly against the notion of natural teleology but also against a realist notion of human nature as well. If humanity as it is today is a more or less jumbled "bricolage" of adaptive parts, it is hardly a secure enough entity to ground ethical obligations. \
\
Thankfully, morality can function without it. The moral law *by itself* guides or forms our actions without a natural *telos* performing that function. For example, Christine Korsgaard's "Authority of Reflection"[@korsgaard1996authority] builds a case that human autonomy -- the ability to be a law to oneself -- is the source of normative authority. How does this work? My own identity as a human being obligates me to behave morally. She argues that "autonomy is the source of obligation" and that "we have *moral* obligations... to humanity as such."[@korsgaard1996authority 93] Because I am self-reflective, I am accountable for what I do. Also because I am self-reflective, I have a self-conception. She says the "thinking self" regulates the "acting self." Korsgaard's notion of practical identity is that we assume identities such as human being, child, parent, teacher, etc. Each identity is functional; it grounds obligations. If I am really to be a teacher, I must show up for class. If I really am to be a parent, I must feed and educate my child. Practical identities may be more or less contingent. All of us are children; not all of us educators. At least one practical identity is necessary. That is our practical identity *as humans*. Humans "need to have practical conceptions of our identity in order to act and live."[@korsgaard1996authority 106] The fact is, we do act and live. Therefore we do have a moral identity. Put another way, she says: \'93Rational action is possible only if human beings find their own humanity to be valuable.\'94[@korsgaard1996authority 106] The moral identity is one in which I take up a viewpoint as a member of the "Kingdom of Ends", the community of those who also have a moral identity. So the moral law delivers content-full moral duties derived from my own autonomously legislated rules prescribed by my valuing humanity; these rules are not teleological in that they require any future fulfillment of an end to validate them. \
\
The point of these objections is to push back on MacIntyre's narrative in which our modern liberal tradition excised *telos*. Either we did not do so, or (even if we did) we could get along without it. \
\
These three objections -- about relativism, tradition-constituted rationality, and teleology -- are some of the most telling against MacIntyre's theory. In the discussion section I shall attempt to answer each one. \
\
\
\
\
\
### *Telos* is not natural but social ###\
\
One objection above stated that teleology (understood as *natural* teleology) is outmoded by Darwinian modern science. While the later MacIntyre (in *Dependent Rational Animals* especially) might want to ground morality in the biological or otherwise natural features of human animals, the early MacIntyre can sidestep this conversation. Since we will discuss natural teleology in other chapters, I think it wise here to argue the more modest point. \
\
All MacIntyre needs to build his virtue theory on human nature is social teleology. We know that *human society is teleological.* We act to achieve goals. Whether we arise from bed *in order to* give a talk, or drive to work *in order to* do a good job, or pursue a career *for* satisfaction and a profitable retirement, we are directing ourselves toward ends. In groups, too, we deliberate about what to do, about *what is to be done*. We pursue group goals. We are directed at group ends. Congress aims to pass just and beneficial laws. The school board aims to increase enrollment and balance the budget.  Our social practices *just are* intelligibly teleological. They cannot be understood without teleology. \
\
We can put the point more strongly: all of human life is a practice. It can be brought under the concept of either one, unified, whole practice or pluralistic set of practices. Human life is, at least viewed under this concept, therefore teleological and indispensably so. Iris Murdoch argued as much in her famous \'93The Sovereignty of Good over other Concepts.\'94[@murdoch1998sovereignty] Even if human life has \'93no external point or \uc0\u964 \u949 \u955 \u959 \u962 \'94, it has one *from within.** We pursue projects. It is impossible, in other words, to bring our own human life under the concept of an *event.* This insight has important implications for ethics, as well as other fields: action theory, sociology, anthropology, philosophy of mind, and so on.[@thompson2008life. One example is Michael Thompson's philosophy of action or what he calls \'93practical philosophy\'94. His assumption-trouncing work contains remarkable depth of insight and simple yet dramatic conclusions. Thompson argues that the concepts of practice, action, and life are successively larger conceptual spheres, where the latter includes the former, but where the former is constitutive of the latter. And upon reflection, each concept exhibits an undeniable Aristotelian structure. Modern theoretical and practical philosophies that obscure these concepts or miss the mark obstruct progress in practical philosophy. While I cannot do justice to Thompson\'92s admirable work here, I mention it to point out that MacIntyre\'92s thesis about \'93social teleology\'94 \'97 the irreducibly teleological or end-directed nature of individual and group human activities \'97 seems correct.] If the objector accepts social teleology, then MacIntyre can rest his case.  \
\
\
### *Telos* is needed ###\
\
One objection above stated that *telos* is indeed a necessary part of morality, but that it can be found in modern morality, for instance, in Kantian or consequentialist morality. If the sense of teleology we are using here is merely social and not natural, then MacIntyre would respond, "so much the better for Kant." Moral rules are unintelligible without an understanding of the *internal* or *necessary* relation between some actions and some outcomes. Kant himself, perhaps, understood this better than many of his contemporary readers give him credit. \
\
\
### *Telos* is not needed ###\
\
Consequentialism, however, cannot be made to be "teleological" in the Aristotelian or the MacIntyrean sense. The first reason is that, For Mill, happiness is something too specific: pleasure, or freedom from pain. He offers precious little justification for this. Mill's definition of happiness cannot be that thing we all necessarily pursue whenever we act, because then moral rules (guiding us toward the happiness of the greatest number) would be unnecessary. We would all, already, pursue happiness. \
\
The second reason is more important: The reason is that Mill and others define "consequences" so as to be always contingent. Mill, like Moore, sees the relation between the end (happiness) and the means (actions that bring about happiness) as statistical, contingent, and probable. There is no internal relation between some actions (such as virtues) and the proper end of human life.\
\
Take as a few examples this statement from G.E. Moore: \
\
>What ought we to do?  The answering of this question constitutes the third great division of ethical enquiry; and its nature was briefly explained in Chap. I (\'a7\'a7 15\'9717). It introduces into Ethics, as was there pointed out, an entirely new question\'97the question what things are related as *causes* to that which is good in itself; and this question can only be answered by an entirely new method\'97the method of empirical investigation; by means of which causes are discovered in the other sciences. *To ask what kind of actions we ought to perform, or what kind of conduct is right, is to ask what kind of effects such action and conduct will produce.* Not a single question in practical Ethics can be answered except by a causal generalization. All such questions do, indeed, also involve an ethical judgment proper\'97the judgment that certain effects are better, in themselves, than others. But they do assert that these better things are effects\'97are causally connected with the actions in question. Every judgment in practical Ethics may be reduced to the form: This is a cause of that good thing.[@moore Chapter 5, Section 89, my emphasis.]\
\
Moore is explicit here that there are no acts that have intrinsic value (qua duty or qua virtuous deed); acts only have value insofar as they cause good effects. This good effects are, for Moore, aesthetic enjoyments, knowledge, and friendships.[@moore Chapter 6.] \
\
I said above that the refusal to treat the means/end distinction as clean and absolute is liable to cause his critics to misunderstand his position. Charles Taylor endorses the notion that \'93the place accorded the virtues [is] a kind of litmus test for discriminating Aristotelian from modern ethical theory.\'94[@taylor 25] He explains this feature of modern moral theories:\
\
>...They cannot abide this kind of relation, in which one element is both cause and constituent of another. It is a central demand of one influential construal of modern reason that one clearly sort out means from ends. For utilitarians, the good is happiness, and virtues can only be good instrumentally... If the basic point of morality is to do the right actions, then the virtues must be seen as purely executive. They cannot also be seen as part of the end, because the end is not defined that way.[@taylor 25] \
\
What could this mean? Behind the means/end distinction is a peculiarly modern assumption that formal and final causes are either not related or not *necessarily* related. But the assumption is unreasonable. Exercise *causes* (efficient causes) health; but it is partly constitutive of health. In other words, exercise *causes* (formal causes) health.  The relation between a formal cause and a final cause is an internal, natural, and necessary relation. In biology, the distinction between form and function is a real one but the two are related.^[@huneman2006naturalising. Huneman summarizes the "two poles" in the history of biology: "the concept of form and the concept of function." For Huneman, anatomy studies form and physiology studies function. He explains how Kant understood both poles and tried to give due weight to the mechanistic understanding of organisms *and* to the distinctive features of organic life. Humean, Kant, and evolutionary biologists are obliged to explain both form and function as real without reducing one to the other.] The relation between the species *gorilla gorilla* as instantiated in an infant gorilla and a fully grown, mature one is an internal and natural and (given the proper circumstances) a necessary relation. To deny that there are formal causes, or to deny that there are final causes, is simply to beg the question against teleological ethics. \
\
For these reasons, consequentialism of the typical sort that *reduces* the question of what actions, rules, or character traits are good to a question that cannot "be answered except by a causal generalization" is not teleological in the required sense. The character traits that tend to bring about happiness must also be, in a sense, pre-payments on that happiness. \
\
\
### Section conclusion ###\
\
In sum, the rebuttal of the \'93no teleology objection" is that the sort of teleology we need is defensible: social teleology. Social teleology does not *necessarily* offend against Darwinian biology, evolutionary psychology, or metaphysical naturalism, but can (and must) be accommodated by them. Furthermore, Kantian philosophy may be able to accommodate social teleology, and so would escape the brunt of MacIntyre's criticism laid out in his narrative. On the other hand, the rebuttal of consequentialism, is that it has not often been taken to allow for a necessary relation between some means and their ends. Virtuous action both *causes* and *partly constitutes* virtuous character. Virtuous character traits both *cause* and *partly constitute* the kind of achievement of our human *telos* that makes life worth living. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
### McDowell on Eudaimonia\
\
McDowell takes the old Stoic line that virtues just *are* eudaimonia. There is nothing more \'93external\'94 to it, certainly nothing external. \
\
\
\
## Foot\
\
Foot argues that happiness is \'93deep satisfaction.\'94 This is compatible with, say, an extremely uncomfortable and even tragic life, like Wittgenstein\'92s. It is not compatible with superficial satisfaction, the froth of pleasure and tittering mirth that floats on a shallow waters. It must be \'93deep\'94, by which I suppose she means that it stands up to our own reflections in a sober hour. \
\
## My View on Telos\
\
### Questions to be Answered\
\
### 1. What if there are no ends in nature? ##\
\
One powerful objection to the recovery of telos is that there is no teleology in nature. There are no *ends* (\uc0\u964 \u949 \u955 \u959 \u953 ). Call this position *teleological nihilism.* There are two forms of teleological nihilism: extreme and moderate. Extreme teleological nihilism we may call the view that there are no "purposes" or natural ends anywhere in the world *including* in human actions. Even our practices, behaviors, and lives are purposeless, even to ourselves. Moderate teleological nihilism we may call the view that there are no natural purposes *except* those in human actions, intentions, and societies, etc. On moderate teleological nihilism, human purposes are not instances of a broader category that includes the tendency of an acorn to become an oak and the tendency of deer to survive and reproduce; human purposes are sui generis phenomena that spontaneously emerge out of our brains at a certain level of complexity. Final causation thinking is then projected out onto the world by us; we observe that the beaver gathered wood and that the beaver built a dam and we say "the beaver gathered wood *in order to* build the dam." But really the beaver did no such thing. This is what philosopher of biology Ernst Mayr calls "teleonomic" natural behavior, but not genuinely teleological.[@mayr1992teleology] \
\
Teleological nihilism claims as its evidence *modern science* as a whole. Natural sciences have dismissed the notion of final causation for three or four centuries now and have gotten along well without it. In fact, natural sciences and the experimental, empirical methods that advance them have progressed far more than anyone could have dreamed. In part, this success is the result of giving up magical thinking. \
\
### Teleology\
\
       %% out of order\
\
That nature is normative and some norms are natural is the best explanation of two phenomena: (1) human cognitive and and practical behaviors are inherently end-directed or teleological: John goes to the gym *in order to get fit for his film role*; Jane practices her speech *to win the Iowa primaries*; and (2) animals, plants, and all living things exhibit end-directed or teleonomic behavior: eyes see, hemlock trees offers shade to fish, stomachs digest, deer leap. The first of these phenomena is less controversial: pretty clearly, humans *act on reasons* and in pursuit of ends. The second is more controversial and more interesting -- is the appearance of teleology "just" teleonomy or teleology indeed? \
\
Call the view that there are no natural end-directed behaviors *teleological nihilism*.[@arnhart1988] 'Strong nihilism' can refer to the belief (of say determinists) that not even human practices are teleological. 'Weak nihilism' can refer to the belief that *only* human behaviors are end-directed, but nothing else. For example, Kant's explanation of natural purpose denies the biological theory that the form of an organism causes the parts to grow and relate to each other in a particular way, but he admits we *cannot help thinking so*.[@huneman2006naturalising]\
\
If the "nature is normative" thesis is true, both forms of teleological nihilism are false. \
\
### 2. What if ends are reducible? ###\
\
Teleoreductionism has taken one of two popular forms: the first reduces 'teleonomic' (that is, apparently teleological) biological functions to causal contributions to a system and the second reduces teleonomic biological functions to naturally selected effects. A proponent of the first reduction is Donald Davidson; a proponent of the second is Ruth Millikan. \
\
### Reducible reply ###\
\
Neither forms of 'teleoreduction' can account for the normativity of the biological function in question. If hearts simply cause %%\
\
James Barham elaborates:\
\
>I was aware of well-known criticisms of both of the then-current reductionist accounts of function: the "causal-role" theory and the Darwin-inspired "selected-effects" theory. In a nutshell, the problem is that neither theory can explain the normative character of biological processes in a coherent manner. (Biological processes are "normative" in the sense that they may either succeed or fail in fulfilling their functions.) With respect to the "causal-role" theory, there is no way to distinguish between functional and non-functional parts of a biological system without presupposing the normative character of the overall system as a whole -- which begs the question at issue.\
>With respect to the "selected-effects" theory, the problem is that selection history is conceptually irrelevant to the identification of function. True, it has a role to play in explaining how present-day functions have come to exist. But selection history cannot possibly explain what it is about a biological process that constitutes it as a function. This is a logical point that Darwinists simply miss. The reason is that our concept of function in no way depends on evolutionary history. If it did, then biologists like Aristotle, Galen, Harvey, and innumerable others who lived long before Darwin would not have had the means to identify the functions of organs, which they of course did. Sometimes, they got it wrong, as when Aristotle placed the seat of perception and thought in the heart, instead of the brain (though some of his predecessors got it right). But Aristotle's mistake was due to his inadequate knowledge of physiology, not to his ignorance of evolution.\
\
Millikan bites the bullet on this objection. She isn't trying to do "conceptual analysis" of the term 'function.' She is willing to admit that her concept of proper function only applies to functional objects with histories and that hypothetical counterexamples involving functional objects without histories prove that two objects with one and the same "*mark* of purposiveness" can have different functions.[\
\
### Biological Teleology\
\
Teleological realism in biology is making a come-back. There are those who protest teleological nihilism. Arnhart persuasively argues that teleology is assumed in medicine.[@arnhart1988] Zammito clarifies ongoing relevance in biology, since organisms seem to be intrinsically purposeful.[@zammito2006teleology]\
\
> In a series of important articles and books over the past decade or so, Bedau (1990, 1992a, 1992b, 1993), Cameron (2004), Christensen & Bickhard (2002), Jacobs (1986), Manning (1997), Maund (2000), McLaughlin (2001, 2009), Mossio et al. (2009), Mundale & Bechtel (1996), Nanay (2010), Nissen (1997), Perovic (2007), Walsh (2006), and Zammito (2006) have cast grave doubt on the coherence of any reductive analysis of function. Some of these authors (e.g., Jacobs, Maund, Zammito) call explicitly for a reconsideration of the possibility that teleological phenomena in biology might be both objectively real and irreducible. \
\
The very word 'teleology' is liable to sound quaint to modern ears. Barham clarifies the range of terms that denote identical or similar concepts: \
\
>"By \'93teleology,\'94 I have in mind such words and concepts as \'93purpose,\'94 \'93end,\'94 \'93goal,\'94 \'93function,\'94 \'93control,\'94 and \'93regulation,\'94 as well as the real- world biological phenomena to which these words and concepts refer. This means that the word \'93teleology\'94 should always be construed here in its internal or \'93immanent\'94 sense\'97purposiveness existing in living beings themselves\'97and never in its external or \'93transcendent\'94 sense of an overarching cosmic principle" (Barham 1). For a similar distinction, see Lennox (1992) and Brown (2001). \
\
We can add "purposive" and "goal-directed" to the constellation of concepts in the offing. \
\
My aim is to discuss a bit more about the details of the human *telos*. I shall assume that Aristotle and Annas are right that happiness is a good enough name for that thing or set of things, whatever it is/they are, that constitute our *telos*. So this is a discussion of happiness.\
\
## 3. Is there telos like happiness for humanity? Destiny and destination\
\
I would like to begin a discussion of happiness by distinguishing between two concepts: destiny and destination. \
\
Roughly, a destiny is an inevitable end. A destination is an *avoidable* end; it is a *chosen* end. Destiny does not contain within it (at least not necessarily) any intentionality. An asteroid many light years away from the moon (let's say) has a destiny of hitting the moon in 180,000 years. It's trajectory, and the coincidental perfect timing of the absence of any intervening objects, makes contact inevitable. \
\
A destination is different. When I told my mother I was moving to Kentucky *to get a PhD in philosophy* I was not describing my inevitable destiny, but describing my chosen destination. Many intervening factors could prevent me (car trouble, illness, etc.) -- and what's more, many factors could *dissuade me* (lack of jobs, money trouble, etc.). \
\
Happiness is our human destination. It is not, sadly, our human destiny. \
\
There is no one factor that seems to capture our destiny except biological death. The major candidates for a hoped-for destiny are not universal: Health, reproduction, and survival. Not all living things are healthy, not all successfully reproduce, and in the end none survive. \
\
But is there a universal human destination? If so, is it merely biological or something more -- perhaps neurophysiological, psychological, or spiritual?\
\
All living things *strive* for health, survival, reproduction and genetic propagation. But all living things, in the end, die. Individuals die when their metabolism stops, when if they have brains all brain functions stop, when they stop moving, and so on. Species "die" when they go extinct. \
\
Socrates is mortal. All men are mortal, and Socrates is man. But so are you and I "men" (the species, not the sex). So our destiny is biological death. \
\
What is our destination? Survival? The avoidance of death? Eternal life? Salvation? Evolution? Pleasure? "Permanent human happiness?"^[The Dalai Lama proposed this formulation.] Peace and nonviolence? Knowledge? The vision of God? Freedom from the wheel of reincarnation? Each of these guesses has something to commend it. \
\
1. The avoidance of death by medical science and/or evolution. This is the transhumanist project of Ray Kurzweil, Google's Calico, and Nick Bostrom. \
2. The avoidance of death by salvation from God as a free gift, or through faith or holiness or both. This is the Christian vision of \
3. The achievement of pleasure while life lasts. This is formalized despair. There is no happiness, therefore eat drink and be "happy" with scare quotes in bold. Our destiny is all we have, so we have no destination. Enjoy the journey until the journey dumps you into the trash compactor. \
4. The vision of God. This is the peculiarly Christian vision. \
5. Freedom from the wheel of reincarnation. \
\
One major distinction can be drawn between these various views along the question of how long human life lasts. Is human life (ideally) about 80 years, or more as medical science advances? Or is the human life countless millennia? This is a factual question that, of course, bears on the question of our telos. \
\
Is there any one conception of happiness that can coordinate these two views? If not, then no discussion of happiness can proceed before either proving or assuming an answer about the length of human life. \
\
Clearly, proving an answer to the satisfaction of all is a fool's errand. It is a  massive, contentious question. One can formulate it in terms of human personhood, the "immortality of the soul," and so on. Andrew Bailey's recent paper calls this the "persistence question": Do human animals have strictly biological persistence conditions?\
\
> Most contemporary animalists also say \'91yes\'92 to the persistence question. According to these animalists, a human animal lasts across an interval just in the case that its \'91purely animal functions \'96 metabolism, the capacity to breathe and circulate one\'92s blood, and the like \'96 continue' across that interval. We may, following Eric Olson, call this theory about the persistence of animals the \'91Biological Approach\'92.\
\
If so, what criteria would such a view have to satisfy? \
\
Given that human beings are rational animals that live either approximately 80 years or forever, what is our destination? The disjunction embedded in the question opens up a discouragingly wide range of possible answers. Nevertheless, let us try to answer it \
\
If there is any *one* thing that animals seek, it is determined by their nature. In my terms, their nature provides a "destiny". But our rational nature makes our way of life variable and hence pluralizes our destiny until death consolidates all those differences again. Hence if there is any *one* thing that rational animals seek, it is determined by the nature of rationality itself. Clearly, different people and cultures vary in believing and valuing particular objects. But variance is compatible with a single *telos* or single *plurality* of teloi. \
\
Variance is compatible with error. \
\
Is there anything rationality seeks by nature? Knowledge. What about practical rationality? Goodness. That is, knowing things *is what reason does*, and pursuing good things *is what practical reason does*; reason also avoid false things, and practical reason avoids evil. \
\
Happiness, the destination of every human being, is to know truth and to attain as much goodness as possible -- whether in the span of 80-90 years (barring illness, injury, and ) until biological death or for the rest of time. \
\
That this is our telos is possible to know even without knowing whether, in fact, our existence persists beyond biological death. \
\
According to Sartre, we must despair. According to Russel we must despair. According to these two, despair is the rational emotion, the emotion that makes most sense given the facts; the emotion that \'93fits\'94 reality. \
\
I think despair is a rational emotion if we are animals who amass goods for 80 years or so and then die, and if our species will eventually go extinct and all habitable planets in the cosmos will become uninhabitable. However, like Russel, the pursuit of knowledge is still worthwhile. It is our human \'93ideals of goodness and knowledge\'94 (I paraphrase Russel) that remain worthwhile pursuits even under the shadow of despair cast by that great reality of death. \
\
## 4. Stephen Brown\'92s Darwinian objection that \'93happiness\'94 of our species is gene propagation, which seems to transform ethics into a descriptive discipline; \
\
## 5. Ruth Millikan\'92s objection that an organism\'92s proper function cannot be read off its capacities but must be known via empirical history.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
#Chapter on Naturalism: Virtue and Nature\
\
## Introduction\
\
Thesis: \'91Naturalism\'92 is a useless word; my view is naturalistic; my normative ethical conclusions can be derived from reflection upon human nature.\
\
### Problems of this chapter\
This chapter cleans up objections from various quarters that the view I have been developing about virtues, that they are acquired realizations of our potential, of humanity\'92s nature as practical, rational, animals. \
\
Some philosophers have objected to this kind of view as insufficiently \'91naturalistic.\'92 Others, strangely enough, have objected the other way that this kind of view is *too* naturalistic. \
\
James Lenman, for instance, faults not only Foot\'92s clarity but about her right to credentials of naturalism. Rehg does as well. \
\
\
Is there anything to this criticism? Since \'91naturalism\'92 is a term that demands definition by stipulation, we do well to translate it into other terms that are accurate to the author\'92s sense but (hopefully) more clear. \
\
### Naturalism is a useless word\
\
It is becoming more plain to anyone who reads the latest literature on "naturalism" that accusations from one philosopher to another that a theory fails to be "naturalistic" are vacuous. \
\
The noun 'Naturalism,' like the adjective, 'natural', is a cognate of 'nature.' Naturalism is an 'ism' attached to the most ambiguous word in our language: nature. But what is 'nature'? To say that various thinkers and various schools of thought defend non-identical definitions of nature would be an understatement. Various thinkers defend incompatible definitions. \
\
There are, by my count, no less than sixteen substantive philosophical positions that fly under the heading of 'naturalism', and they couldn't be more different: from Paul and Patricia Churchland's monistic physicalism, to John McDowell's "relaxed naturalism", to William James' neutral monism, to Thomas Aquinas' natural law theory, to Stoic pantheism, and more. Is there any question that these views are not just different but incompatible?  \
\
Consider an example to see how the competing understandings of nature render discussion about whether "x is really naturalistic" almost meaningless. \
\
Suppose Bob thinks 'nature' is simply another word for the concept of 'all that which is', all of reality, being. Nature is everything. His colleague Bettie thinks 'nature' is a word that picks out something special, namely that part of 'all that is' that is cosmic, that part of reality that constitutes *this* world. For Bob, nature is being. For Bettie, nature is part of being. \
\
In a discussion one day, Bob says, "You know, Bettie, I attended a lecture on angels yesterday. Being a naturalist, I was interested in the nature of angels. I believe some real beings are not physical beings but intellectual or spiritual beings -- but what is their nature? The lecturer argued that they are intellectual substances or disembodied minds. I found that compelling." Bettie replies,  "I certainly agree that some real beings are not physical beings but intellectual or spiritual beings. But being a naturalist, I would not say angels have a 'nature' or any 'natural properties' since they are not physical. Rather, angels have an essence." \
\
Is there any question that a hard-nosed physicalist such as Frank Jackson or Alan Gibbard would have an aneurysm listening to this conversation? \
\
Their colleague, Charlie, agrees with Bob in thinking 'nature' is simply another word for the concept of 'all that which is', all of reality, being -- but he is a materialist.[^20] Naturally enough, he thinks "because I am a naturalist, I do not think angels are real beings and part of the global world order, since they are not physical. I probably would not attend a lecture on angels in the first place." Charlie might look cross-eyed at Bob and Bettie during their exchange; Bob and Bettie might look cross-eyed at him back. \
\
Bob accuses Charlie of being a non-naturalist. Why? Because Charlie denies part of reality. A true naturalist accepts all of reality, whether material or not. Charlie is a dogmatist about denying fairies, demons, gods, angels, ghosts, and any other purported being that has the gall not to be material; Bob is more ecumenical and can examine the evidence for each purported being as it comes. \
\
[^20]: I say "materialist" and not "physicalist" because "physis" is Greek for "nature" and so the problem iterates.\
\
The point of these dialogues is this: The title 'naturalist' can, without contradiction, be claimed by Bob, Bettie, and Charlie. Each with a straight face owns the title, defends it against rivals, and criticizes the silly notions of their colleagues as "non-naturalistic." Bob is a non-naturalist to Bettie and Charlie because he thinks immaterial angels are part of nature, are members of the natural order. Bettie is a non-naturalist to Charlie because she thinks that angels exist above and beyond the material order. Charlie is a a non-naturalist to Bob because Charlie does not accept *all* of nature. \
\
This problem is iterative. It does no good to call Charlie a "physicalist" -- the term "physis" means "nature" so 'physicalist' is a Greek language version of the Latin language 'naturalist.' The question is whether angels have a *physis*. \
\
If the label is universally applicable, it is useless in the attempt to construct clear arguments with clear propositions. If it is useless for such purposes, it is *a fortiriori* pointless to use the term as an epithet of praise or blame. Yet despite this general conceptual anarchy, some philosophers emit the accusation of 'naturalism' or 'non-naturalism' as if uttering a curse. They seem to believe the sheer force of being called a naturalist or non-naturalist will melt their opponent's resolve and refute their position.\
\
I should say that among the crew of naturalists like myself, it is perfectly well to point out that "that fellow over there is not a naturalist like us" -- as long as we can recognize that that fellow and his crew are pointing to me and saying "that fellow over there is not a naturalist like us." Our disagreement is real. But it is over what 'nature' consists in and not whether some view ought to be taxonomized in philosophy encyclopedias as a 'naturalistic' view or not. I cannot imagine any philosophical view whatsoever -- pansychism, Parmenidean monism, nihilism -- that cannot be presented (without contradiction) as a variety of naturalism. \
\
So what question should we ask about view X? We should ask what *kind* of naturalism X is. But this is the same as asking whether it is true or false. And that is a worthwhile question. \
\
      \
### Fink on Nature\
\
How many competing notions of nature are there? Roughly three that are important for philosophical purposes.^[%% Finish Fink]\
\
\
### Three alternatives to natural normativity (if not included elsewhere)\
\
1. **Nature is purely descriptive.** Bald nature is a realm of pure, descriptive fact.^[John McDowell calls this kind of naturalism \'91neo-Humean naturalism\'92 (*Mind, Values, Reality*, 183, 194) or \'91empiricistic naturalism\'92, \'91bald naturalism\'92,  \'91naturalism of the realm of law\'92 or \'91naturalism of disenchanted nature\'92.] The problem with this picture is that human beings would not be natural. The other side of the same coin is the view that normativity, whatever it is, is not natural.[@shafer2003moralrealism offers an argument that moral properties are "non-natural" in that they can be known without empirical help, but "natural" in that they are perhaps always realized in the physical, natural world.] But then again, human beings would not be natural if we are in any sense irreducibly normative. For normativity is central to human consciousness and value, and perhaps even language and meaning. As Julia Annas puts it: "Non-naturalistic accounts of ethical terms assume that their function, prominently their normativity, is something that arises with humans, or is produced by humans, in a way which owes nothing to the nature which we share with other living things."[@annas2005virtue 12] If nature cannot include irreducible normativity such as that which is essential to langauge and morality, surprisingly, it cannot include us. I think we ought to reject any picture of nature or of science that exiles naturalists and scientists. \
\
3. **Normativity actually descriptive.** Some zealous defenders of bald nature will be quick to assure me that normativity can and will be one day "reduced" to mere description. Beside the fact that such promises in philosophy of mind have been very long in the fulfilling, I think such assurances are especially misguided in this case. Telling me that normativity is, after all, *really* just descriptivity disguised or mistaken seems to me self-referentially incoherent. It is like arguing that one 'ought' not tell anyone what they 'ought to do.' Of course, arguing that one 'ought not' talk like that is an instance of telling me what I *ought* to do. Similarly, arguing that on best evidence everyone *ought* to believe that normativity is in principle reducible is an instance of appealing to fundamental, irreducible normative considerations about evidence and reasons for belief. To quote Annas again: "it strikes me as ironical that such accounts often arise... From an excessive respect for science. Not only do they cut off our self understanding from the understanding we have of other things, they prevent us from seeing continuities between us and other living things, and in both these ways reveal themselves as profoundly anti-scientific."[@annas2005virtue 13] Some may choose to wait (perhaps forever) for the promised reductions of the normative to the non-normative. I elect to move on. \
\
4. **Nature is unknown**. A final alternative, this one more desparate, would be to argue that nature is mysterious and that we cannot know the truth of generic statements. But, such a skeptical move renders us safe from natural normativity but at the cost of endorsing absurdity: isn't it scientific knowledge that penguins are birds, that eyes are adapted for seeing? I'm not sure how to debate someone who seriously would deny such statements. \
\
\
### Chris Toner, "Sorts of Naturalism"\
\
There is a distinction between some generic statement -- empirical, biological, metaphysical -- and the kind of statement that can serve as a reason. \
\
Christopher Toner attempts to draw out just this distinction.[@toner2008sorts] \
\
Toner agrees with Hursthouse that the term 'Aristotelian naturalism' "implies that human nature is normative, such that to be morally good is to fulfill one's nature."[@toner2008sorts 221.] Hursthouse and McDowell can confirm this reading: Hursthouse herself says that "Virtue ethics, or at least any form of it that takes its inspiration from Aristotle, is usually taken to be a form of ethical naturalism -- broadly, the enterprise of basing ethics in some way on consideration of human nature, on what is involved with being good *qua* human being."[@hursthouse1998 192] McDowell too believe that it is possible to "formulate a conception of reason that is, in one sense, naturalistic: a formed state of practical reason is one's second nature, not something that dictates to one's nature from outside."[@mcdowell1998two] However, Toner argues that Thompson\'92s, Hursthouse\'92s, and Foot\'92s brands of naturalism cannot adequately respond to a criticism McDowell (among others) have pressed. Toner presents four criteria that \'93naturalism must deliver if it is to support a revived Aristotelian virtue ethics\'85\'94[@toner2008sorts 222] \
\
\
Since we have already discussed each of these types of naturalism elsewhere, I shall only offer the briefest summaries \
\
#### Thompson\
\
Thompson's naturalism is "an attempt to work out the special logic of judgments we make about living things, and then to indicate its application to ethics." That 'special logic' is variously called "natural-historical judgment", "Aristotelian categorical", and (we might add) "generics".[see @leslie2008generics for a discussion of generics in general; and see  @bailey2015animalism for a discussion of a specific generic: "we are animals".] I shall use my preferred term, the shorter and less adorned, \'93generic\'94. Many generics take the form \'93S is F\'94 or \'93S has or does F\'94. They are not true universals that can be translated rigorously as \'93for any x, if x is an S, then S is F\'94 nor are they mere existentials that can be translated as \'93for some x, if x is S, then S is F.\'94 Particular or existential statements like the latter are true but uninteresting. A generic is interesting because it is, or we treat it as, a truth about forms, or species. The subject of the statement is not all S\'92s nor merely some S\'92s, but the \'93infama species.\'94[@toner2008sorts 222, quoting Thompson] Such judgments \'93admit of combination into teleological judgments\'94 such as *penguins are countershaded in order to avoid predators from above and below.* Thompson insists that judgments about natural teleology are made true from the form of life under question, not from \'93hypotheses about the past\'94 (and Toner adds \'93whether about creation or natural selection\'94).[@toner2008sorts 223. Cf. (Thompson 1995, 293)] Since an individual penguin may fail to be countershaded in the way that expresses its form, it would be defective. This defect is not a judgment made by scientists and \'93imposed\'94 as it were, from the outside, on the penguin; but a normative fact about the penguin. \
\
#### Foot\
\
Foot elaborates on Thompson\'92s type of naturalism. \
\
\
\
### Hursthouse\
\
Toner interprets Hursthouse as endorsing a modified type of egoism: \
\
>Dualism of this sort is hardly new \'97 it is characteristic of standard Kantian and consequentialist moral psychologies \'97 but it is a bit unusual for a virtue ethics claiming allegiance to Aristotle to embrace it. Indeed, it seems to raise the rather un-Aristotelian question about how to handle a conflict between fundamental practical commitments. Much that Hurst- house says hints that self-interest has priority: virtue ethics \'91\'91offers a distinctively unfamiliar version of the view that morality is a form of enlightened self-interest\'92\'92 (1999, 190). Also, she seems to recognize the McDowellian point that Aristotelian categoricals about how an evolved species as a matter of fact propagates itself through time may have little normative claim on a reflective agent. Her response is to insist that the life of virtue does in fact tend to promote the welfare of the virtuous agent, so that the commitment to one\'92s well-being seems more basic than, and a necessary ground of, the commitment to one\'92s functioning as a species member (see especially 1999, 259\'9660). \
> This move both highlights the power of McDowell\'92s critique of the Thompsonian form of Aristotelian naturalism and illustrates how tempting it is, for naturalists equipped with only a disenchanted nature, to allow eudaimonism to collapse into egoism.9 Hursthouse comes close to this collapse; Arnhart will come closer still.[@toner2008sorts 230] \
If generics are supposed to pick out natural properties of human beings, and if all such natural properties belong to disenchanted nature, then the ethical conclusions we draw will \'93collapse into egoism.\'94 Eudaimonia will get a very \'93disenchanted\'94 definition (pleasure, reproductive success, ff\
\
\
#### MacIntyrean Naturalism\
\
Toner argues that a naturalistic theory must satisfy four requirements:\
\
1. Natural norms must be intrinsically able to motivate the bearer of the nature. \uc0\u8232 \
\
The "natural norm" must be intrinsically able to motivate: desires that *do* motivate us satisfy this requirement. However, unless there is some "supervising principle" that coordinates desires (suppressing some, elevating others) the desires themselves seem to lead us to a sub-moral life; and the addition of such a supervising principle makes the theory no longer naturalistic. \
\
\
2. Natural norms must be intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of the nature. \uc0\u8232 \
\
The natural norm must be something that justifies itself, either to all rational agents as such or to all moral agents. The norm need not, Toner admits, automatically persuade a Callicles to repent of his wickedness. However, it must be able to motivate. \
\
>This is why I say \'91\'91intrinsically able to motivate or justify\'92\'92 rather than \'91\'91in- trinsically motivating or justifying\'92\'92: the natural norm is such that it can motivate or convince persons, provided they are not in too dysfunctional a state. In the same way a rose is such as to be intrinsically able to convince us of its being red. Its failure actually to do so in my case because I am color-blind or jaundiced does not impugn this intrinsic ability. Natural norms can motivate and convince because they are neither \'91\'91mere facts\'92\'92 about the way a given species does go on nor \'91\'91brute desires\'92\'92 a given species happens to have as a result of its evolutionary history.[@toner2008sorts 235]\
\
3. Natural norms must be anchored in and express universal human nature. \
\
\
>If we want a naturalistic virtue ethics that is self-standing, natural norms must be capable not only of expressing the commitments of this or that culture but also of justifying that one, criticizing this one, and so forth.\
But what sort of thing is this universal human nature to be, if we are to avoid the problems of Thompson and Arnhart? It is to be, as Thompson said, \'91\'91what was formerly called an infima species,\'92\'92 the representation of which expresses \'91\'91one\'92s interpretation or understanding of the life-form shared by the members of that class\'92\'92 (1995, 288). This view runs into the troubles catalogued above if (and only if) we understand \'91\'91one\'92s interpretation or understanding\'92\'92 to be that provided by modern \'91\'91value-free\'92\'92 science, a list of categoricals or natural desires supplied by anthropology and evolutionary psychology. Suppose instead this understanding of nature were supplied from the standpoint of a second nature seeking to understand its own development, so that the \'91\'91universal nature\'92\'92 of (3) would be at its core our shared tendency to become and then to be and act as certain kinds of people. First nature on this interpretation would be that in all of us which points toward and calls for the development of second nature, and second nature would be that which perfects and completes first nature. Another way of putting this is:\
\
\
4. First and second nature must be related so that the second is a natural outgrowth of the first, and so that that in our given makeup is (first) natural which does tend toward an ethically mature second nature. \uc0\u8232 \
\
\
>Alasdair MacIntyre writes that we can rightly understand the goods, harms, needs, and vulnerabilities of a certain species only by appeal to a notion of what it is for its members to flourish (MacIntyre 1999, 63\'9665). Now, for a living being to flourish it must develop its powers, especially those distinctive of it as a member of its species (there is more to flourishing than that, he allows, but this is at its core), and whether an individual or group is flourishing \'91\'91is in itself a question of fact, even though the question of what it is to flourish has to be answered in part through evaluative and conceptual enquiry\'92\'92 (1999, 64). \
>MacIntyre exemplifies the end-first approach sketched above, and it is worth quoting him at some length to see this:\
> As a question of fact it [what it is to flourish] receives answers in a variety of scientific contexts. Distinguishing between environments in which members of some particular species flourish and environments in which they fail to flourish and distinguishing within some particular population those individuals or groups of a particular species that are flourishing from those that are not is a necessary preliminary to framing certain types of explanatory question which we provided with answers by the biological and ecological sciences. Drawing these distinctions successfully involves identifying the various characteristics that an individual or population of some particular species needs in order to flourish in this or that particular environment, at this or that particular stage of development. (1999, 64\'9665)\
> We start with a revisable account of what it is for an animal to flourish (for example, being a good pack hunter) and then ask scientific questions about what sort of environment, the development of which distinctive powers, and so forth, the animal needs. Now, the power most distinctive of human beings as a species is, of course, rationality. We know this in part because were it not, it would not be the case that we, and only we, were asking questions about the powers distinctive of species. Also, writes MacIntyre, \'91\'91the question \'91Why should I do this rather than that?\'92 becomes from an early age inescapable and it is characteristic of human beings, that their replies to this question can themselves always be put in question. . . . Human beings need to learn to understand themselves as practical reasoners about goods, about what on particular occasions it is best for them to do and about how it is best for them to live out their lives\'92\'92 (1999, 67). So we know, says MacIntyre, that a flourishing human being is one who reasons well about how to live his or her life, is what he will call an \'91\'91independent practical reasoner.\'92\'92 That is our infima species or form of life. From this initial conception of flourishing, we can reason back to our needs, vulnerabilities, goods, and salient first-natural devel- opmental tendencies.\
\
>Much of the detailed argument must be passed over, but let us crystallize the point MacIntyre is making: membership in networks of giving and receiving is essential to human flourishing, and the exercise of the virtues is essential to the maintenance of such networks, and therefore to flourishing. And essential not just as instrumental to but as constitutive means of flourishingFvirtues are expressed in practical reasoning, and sustained and effective practical reasoning takes place only within net- works of giving and receiving.\
\
#### The task \
\
>Although I have tried to anticipate and turn aside some important objections, whether the MacIntyrean sort of naturalism is acceptable ultimately depends on answers to some rather large questions involving the nature of rationality (for example, whether it is tradition-constituted in something like the way MacIntyre says), moral psychology (for example, whether McDowell and MacIntyre are right in rejecting the \'91\'91hydraulic\'92\'92 psychology of neo-Humeans like Arnhart), and even meta- physics (for example, whether and how moral philosophy is related to theology). But such interdependences are what we must expect for an ethic purporting to be based on a true understanding of human nature. \
This chapter takes up one of Toner\'92s challenges: to defend a notion of practical reason as importantly constituted by \'93tradition\'94 \'97 that is, by particular cultural methods, facts, doctrines, and emphases transmitted within a particular people group over time. \
\
In a final chapter, or in future projects, I hope to take up the question of the relation of moral philosophy to theology. \
\
\
\
### References\
\
Toner, Christopher. "Sorts of naturalism: requirements for a successful theory." Metaphilosophy 39, no. 2 (2008): 220-250.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
## MacIntyre on nature\
   \
For MacIntyre, who is allergic to metaphysics, he does not give a robust account of nature. He seems to assume a Laplacian picture of disenchanted nature in *Dependent Rational Animals*: nature which is a somewhat random bricolage of matter, energy, constants, wave functions, and so on, and somehow produces living organisms which through mutation and natural selection become creatures like us. \
\
## Foot on nature\
\
Foot\'92s picture of nature is friendly to the Aristotelian picture. Those parts of nature that constitute living organisms are characterized not only by their material origins, material parts, and material organization but also by their functions. \
\
## McDowell on nature\
\
McDowell\'92s picture of nature is radically dualistic. He too is allergic to metaphysics in the sense that he doesn\'92t take himself to be attempting to describe the world as it is \'93given.\'94 Rather, he sees humans as occupants of \'93second nature\'94 \'97 our receptivity to reasons is not \'93baldly natural.\'94 Animals do not have a second nature but only a primary nature. Bald nature, primary nature, is descriptive. It is a Laplacian picture. \
\
## Annas on Nature\
\
There are roughtly three options, Annas says: basing ethics on theories of nature, on non-natural properties (like goodness); or on religious or metaphysical theories. So, some virtue ethical theories are based on religious or metaphysical theories (Christian ethics, Platonic ethics). Other ethical theories (not necessarily virtue theories) treat 'the good' as sui generis, non-natural property. But naturalistic virtue ethics aims to position phrases like 'a good human' in conscious juxtaposition with 'a good plant' or 'a good penguin.'\
\
## My view on nature\
\
### Questions to be Answered\
\
1. Are ethical norms natural?\
2. What does naturalism mean?\
3. Is the meaning of naturalism just stipulated?\
4. Is reason natural?\
5. Is human culture natural?\
6. Is naturalism just atheism?\
7. Is naturalism just materialism (which could be theistic)?\
\
Naturalist objection clarified\
\
This leads to the question of whether ethical norms are 'natural'?  Are moral facts, or what I am calling simply 'norms' natural? This seems like a pressing and substantive question whose answer will affect much. After doing the research for this dissertation, I no longer think it is a pressing or substantive question. It is not just vague but hopelessly vague; not just ambiguous but fatally ambiguous. \
\
There is a danger that labels, which are useful for categorization, storage, and quick reference of arguments and beliefs, become more important than substantive arguments. I take my metaethical view to be a brand of normative realism, emphasizing moral norms but using epistemic norms as allies. I take my normative ethical view to be a brand of virtue ethics. Talk about virtues, human nature, and flourishing or happiness I find the most helpful in solving knotty metaethical puzzles. Sometimes, as Thomas Nagel reminds me, the only solution to metaethical puzzles is to stick to primary ethical tools. \
\
So, what we mean by \'91natural\'92? What we  \'97 friends and foes of metanormative realism \'97 mean by \'91natural\'92? \
\
* We could mean that values are endemic to human nature, to humans, and that humans are natural. Examples: John McDowell, Philippa Foot.  The core concern here is to save the appearances but respect as much scientism as possible. \
* We could mean that values are features of the natural world just like natural kinds. Example: Richard Boyd. The core concern here is atheism.\
* Values could be natural the way that health is natural and anything that produces health. Example: Paul Bloomfield. The core concern here is humanism.\
* Still others might argue that values are natural that supervene on normal natural facts the same way psychological facts supervene on normal physical facts. Example: Frank Jackson. The core concern here is physicalism.\
\
But the fundamental tension between "inside" and "outside" might itself be a misunderstanding. That seems to be one of John McDowell's main points. \
\
What if the objection from discontinuity or dissonance is misguided? It seems that "science" supports reductive materialist metaphysics but what if our "respect for natural science" demands nothing of the sort? Then the objection against realism weakens. And its inherent plausibility and truly amazing explanatory power shines forth again unabated. \
\
4. Are these norms "natural"?\
   * Are these norms radically anomalous? Are they strange, queer, discontinuous? \
   * Are such norms physical/material? (Nagel, McDowell)\
   * Are such norms divine? \
5. Where do such norms come from? Do they happen to emerge from our biology? Do they come from the mouth of a god? Are they necessary features of our rational nature and other other creatures with a rational nature? \
\
My claim is that: \
\
1. These norms are 'natural' but that the question 'Is X natural?' is almost vacuous. \
   * These norms are not radically anomolous. They are not strange, queer, discontinuous.  (Nagel)\
   * These norms are not material. (Nagel, McDowell)\
   * These norms are not emergent properties arising from our biology. (Foot, Brown)\
5. These norms are internally related to human nature (via practical rationality). (Foot, McDowell, Kant)\
\
For the purpose of these essays, I remain agnostic as to whether these norms come from any particular personal god. But I do claim that they are divine. The contrast is likely to strike the reader as strange. By 'divine' I mean that they transcend our animal biology and that conformity to them makes us rational, acting creatures full of wisdom and virtue.  Affirming the divinity of some norms is consonant with a variety of theistic views: Aristotle's god is neither Brahman nor Jehovah. \
\
But insofar as 'naturalist' is just a label for 'atheist,' then my argument entails that naturalism is false. But I deny the charge that my view is "non-naturalistic." Insofar as 'naturalist' is a label for 'one who believes in the radical continuity of facts, the uniformity and harmony of reality,' I vehemently claim the label as my own. In order to claim the label as my own, I must show that they are mistaken who think reality is radically continuous because reality is fundamentally physical or material. \
\
The best evidence that reality is not fundamentally material is human nature, rationality and practical rationality, including primary norms. \
\
Having removed the teeth from the overriding motivation to be "naturalistic", these rival views turn out simply to be half-hearted substitutes for virtue. They are not even properly "rivals" nor are they clear-headed. The clear-headed work to be done is to clarify objections to virtue theory and articulate better answers and explanations. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
#Chapter on Religion: Virtue and God\
\
\'93Anglo-American moral philosophy [has moved] beyond the limitations not only of A.J. Ayer and C.L. Stevenson, but also of Hume\'92s focus on sentiment, on the one hand, and Kant\'92s focus on reason on the other. Contemporary ethics is about the whole human being, seen as biological, social and cultural, emotional and reflective.\'94[@atkins2005morality]\
\
Can a metaphysical naturalist be a virtue ethicist? I am a theist but very interested in metaphysical naturalism. Virtue ethics has a long history, while metaphysical naturalism has only recently attained dominance. John McDowell is a \'93relaxed naturalist\'94 but a critic of \'93scientism\'94. And Stephen R. Brown is a naturalist in the broad sense but a virtue ethicist. So I am working to see if and how a naturalist can be a virtue ethicist, and what \'93naturalism\'94 might mean in this context.\
\
\
### The Primacy of \'91Ought\'92 Over Is\
\
The fundamental problem with the prevailing brand of metaphysical naturalism is that it believes that facts are ultimately descriptive. When it runs into various kinds of normative or prescriptive facts, it short circuits. Naturalism can neither deny, eliminate, or reduce normativity. \
\
The fundamental solution with my brand of metaphysical naturalism is that it admits that facts themselves are ultimately normative. When it runs into various kinds of descriptive facts, it can explain them as *successful*. \'91Ought\'92 is foundational to the bedrock of nature and the cosmos because everything ought to be some way. Most things *are* as they *ought* to be. But some aren\'92t. \
\
My neo-Stoic naturalism can explain both why descriptive facts are the way they are, and why normative facts are the way they are (most of the time) and why some things are *not* the way they ought to be; namely, rational creatures can err through overwhelming passion. \
\
#Chapter Final\
\
\
\'93The ancients were fools who thought rain fell from clouds, plants grew because of sunshine, pregnancy was caused by the transfer of seed in sexual intercourse, and that human beings need society in order to survive.\'94\
\
The sentiment of this statement is common. The speaker is, himself, a fool. The fact that a belief was endorsed by the ancients (or rejected by them) is irrelevant to the truth of the belief. There are many beliefs who enjoy a joint endorsement from ancients and 21
\fs16 \super st
\fs24 \nosupersub  century technological, digital humanity. We ought not overstate the differences.\
\
What is different? The biggest differences seem to be in certain advances in technology, especially transportation, communication, and medicine. The ancients (indeed Galileo himself) could not fly in airplanes, transmit wireless signals to satellites, observe moon rock in a lab, or take an antibiotic to clear up a sinus infection. \
\
Are there any other, deep, weighty, existential differences in the worldview of the past and that of the present? There are none. Some are fond of suggesting that \'93we now know\'94 big truths that the ancients did not, like that demons do not cause mental illness. However, most such sage utterances are run-of-the-mill instances of circular reasoning. \
\
A useful test of rhetoric is the symmetry test: switch the content of the proposition to mean the opposite and see if the rhetorical force is fully preserved. For example, \'93Once upon a time, fools and charlatans used to believe there were only 7 planets. We now know that Pluto is a ninth planet.\'94 The smugness, the bravado, the grandiloquence, the accents of infallibility are identical, but the content is false. \
\
In order to assess the possibility of spiritual entities affecting physical conditions, in order to assess the possible existence of spiritual entities \'97 malevolent or otherwise \'97 we must examine the evidence. Those who have made up their minds and are therefore dismissive of the claims of their opponents may enjoy agreeing with the like-minded but merely asserting their joint position is useless in proving their position or refuting their opponent\'92s. \
\
\
### Introduction to final chapter\
\
\
### Conclusion of Final Chapter\
\
### What is the Title of the Dissertation? \
\
**The Point Virtue: Humanity, Reason, and Happiness**\
**Practical Reason in Recent Neo-Aristotelian Virtue Ethics**\
\
### Final sentence\
\
Much (if not all) ethical truth can be known and justified by reflection upon our nature as practical, rational animals. Thus we can see that virtue is excellence of humanity \'97 especially practical reason \'97 that partly constitutes human flourishing. }