{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 # Reason and nature: naturalism strikes back\
\
This account may or may not sound plausible to the reader. The case for these conclusions below may or may not be persuasive to the reader. If they are not persuasive, the resistance is likely to arise from a commitment to *naturalism* combined with the belief that the "objective normativity" of practical rationality is somehow not consonant with naturalism. Nature consists of descriptive facts while objective normativity posits evaluative and normative facts "out there" in the world. The reader may notice that this alleged contrast -- between nature and normativity -- is the same contrast we attempted to dismantle above. The dilemma of ethical naturalism rises again: if ethics is normative, how is it natural? If it is natural, how is it normative?\
\
A remain problem is the relation between reason and nature, between what is known scientifically and what is known practically. A highly intractable but desirable goal would be to understand the process of practical reasoning in light of our animal nature and our place in the biological and physical order. The question is just how to do that. Is human nature just another example of a biological nature, like chimpanzees and dolphins, subject to evaluation by the same patterns of normativity? Since humanity is something quite different, on account of our rational self-awareness and practical agency, have we left naturalism behind?\
\
In this chapter, I defend an unrestricted conception of nature according to which the account given is still satisfyingly naturalistic. I criticize restricted conceptions of nature according to which the dilemma just posed seems intractable. \
\
For if objective norms may be known from an external, scientific point of view, even so, they are impractical; human rationality allows us to reflect upon them and decide whether or not to allow them to count as reasons for action. Alternately, if norms of practical reason are knowable from within the practical (subjective, internal, non-scientific) point of view, then they the objective facts of our nature are irrelevant. If by being practical reasoners we are free of the tyranny of biology, then biology is irrelevant to morality.  \
\
Rather, morality is only accessible from the practical point of view intrinsic to human nature. And the practical point of view is not "scientific", even if it is broadly "naturalistic." Hursthouse assumes that knowledge of humanity "from the outside" is useless or futile. She says, "Ethical naturalism is not to be construed as the attempt to ground ethical evaluations in a scientific account of human nature."[@hursthouse1998virtue especially chapter 10] Hursthouse and McDowell's alternative is to base ethical considerations on our nature as rational agents. This is still loosely naturalistic, in that we are talking about "human nature" or "second nature".  However, it grounds ethical norms in the intrinsic ends that belong to practical reasoning creatures. In response to this worry, Rosalind Hursthouse's response is to reassure us that: "Ethical naturalism is not to be construed as the attempt to ground ethical evaluations in a scientific account of human nature."[@hursthouse1998virtue especially chapter 10] Nevertheless, she *does* endorse the project of grounding ethical evaluations in human nature. So how is this to be done? \
\
## Toner's Criteria\
\
Chris Toner argues that the brands of naturalism espoused by Thompson, Hursthouse, and Foot -- the same sort I have defended above -- cannot adequately respond to a criticism McDowell (among others) have pressed. Toner presents four criteria that \'93naturalism must deliver if it is to support a revived Aristotelian virtue ethics\'85\'94[@toner2008sorts 222]  \
\
Natural norms must be intrinsically motivating (or practical), they must be intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of that nature (upon reflection, they seem binding, even if they do not mechanically determine one's action); they must be anchored in and express universal human nature; and first and second nature must be related in such a way that the second nature is an outgrowth of the first so that that in our given makeup is (first) natural which does tend toward an ethically mature second nature. \
\
Some of these we have already satisfied, but others remain. Let's review them in a bit more detail. \
\
1. Natural norms must be intrinsically able to motivate the bearer of the nature. \uc0\u8232 \
\
The "natural norm" must be intrinsically able to motivate: desires that *do* motivate us satisfy this requirement. However, unless there is some "supervising principle" that coordinates desires (suppressing some, elevating others) the desires themselves seem to lead us to a sub-moral life; and the addition of such a supervising principle makes the theory no longer naturalistic. \
\
\
2. Natural norms must be intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of the nature. \
\
The natural norm must be something that justifies itself, either to all rational agents as such or to all moral agents. The norm need not, Toner admits, automatically persuade a Callicles to repent of his wickedness. However, it must be able to motivate. \
\
>This is why I say \'91\'91intrinsically able to motivate or justify\'92\'92 rather than \'91\'91intrinsically motivating or justifying\'92\'92: the natural norm is such that it can motivate or convince persons, provided they are not in too dysfunctional a state. In the same way a rose is such as to be intrinsically able to convince us of its being red. Its failure actually to do so in my case because I am color-blind or jaundiced does not impugn this intrinsic ability. Natural norms can motivate and convince because they are neither \'91\'91mere facts\'92\'92 about the way a given species does go on nor \'91\'91brute desires\'92\'92 a given species happens to have as a result of its evolutionary history.[@toner2008sorts 235]\
\
Micah Lott calls this the "authority-of-nature challenge"^[In @lott2012moral 770]. "The challenge depends on an apparent gap between what naturally good for us qua human beings (=the normal) and what has a claim upon our reason (=the normative)." Natural norms are either "normal" (i.e., natural) or "normative" (i.e., binding, authoritative, etc.)\uc0\u8232 \
\
3. Natural norms must be anchored in and express universal human nature. \
\
This was the task of chapter 3. \
\
The fourth criterion is our aim. \
\
\
4. First and second nature must be related so that the second is a natural outgrowth of the first, and so that that in our given makeup is (first) natural which does tend toward an ethically mature second nature. \
\
Even though McDowell is critical of Foot's biological or organic naturalism, he does not wish to fall into a dualism between biology and rationality. Rather, he believes that it is possible to "formulate a conception of reason that is, in one sense, naturalistic: a formed state of practical reason is one's second nature, not something that dictates to one's nature from outside."[@mcdowell1998two] \
\
Let's state McDowell's objection. This objection McDowell shares with non-naturalist realists, subjectivists, and moral anti-realists. On the other hand, he does not think that goodness is *purely* subjective, originating in moral evaluators and projected outward by them onto the world. I will try, in this section, to get a clear handle on this paradoxical view. An initial quotation from McDowell expresses his relation to Foot:\
\
>Philippa Foot has long urged the attractions of ethical naturalism. I applaud the negative part of her point, which is to reject various sorts of subjectivism and supernaturalist rationalism. But I doubt whether we can understand a positive naturalism in the right way without first rectifying a constriction that the concept of nature is liable to undergo in our thinking. Without such preliminaries, what we make of ethical naturalism will not be the radical and satisfying alternative to Mrs Foot\'92s targets that naturalism can be. Mrs Foot\'92s writings do not pay much attention to the concept of nature in its own right, and this leaves a risk that her naturalism may seem to belong to this less satisfying variety. I hope an attempt to explain this will be an appropriate token of friendship and admiration.[@mcdowell1998mindvalue 167]\
\
As this quotation makes clear, McDowell shares Foot's rejection of "subjectivism and supernaturalist rationalism" but he disputes her "concept of nature". McDowell's classifies his own view as a "sort of naturalism" -- namely "relaxed naturalism."^[He calls it by a variety of other names: 'liberal' naturalism' (@mcdowell1996mind 89, 98); 'acceptable naturalism' (@mcdowell1998mindvalue 197). Like Thomas Nagel, he also finds friends in Plato and Aristotle, calling his view \'91Greek naturalism\'92 (@mcdowell1996mind 174), \'91Aristotelian naturalism\'92 (@mcdowell1996mind 196), \'91naturalism of second nature\'92 (@mcdowell1996mind 86), or \'91naturalized platonism\'92 (@mcdowell1996mind 91). Cf. @fink 204; and @goetz2008naturalism.] Farreira calls McDowell-type views "excellence naturalism" and Foot-type views "empirical naturalism". McDowell invokes Aristotle\'92s notion of ethics, by which he hopes to rethink our conception of human nature and nature as a whole. He says, \'93the rethinking requires a different conception of actualizations of our nature.\'94[@mcdowell1996mind 77] Second nature is that space in which human beings are initiated into particular ways of behaving and knowing.  \
\
\
10. For McDowell, nature consists of Lockean primary qualities, which are response-independent as well as dispositional properties which are response-dependent. "Values" are the latter sort. There is no such thing as "to-be-pursuedness" existing as a Lockean primary quality in first nature. Nevertheless, values are not merely subjective fantasy. They are intersubjective, grounded in a form of life, grounded in our rationality itself. \
\
\
What is his objection to Foot's view? She thinks that normative facts are response-independent features of nature. He says that the naive realist view (that moral values are response-independent) is "impossible -- at least on reflection -- to take seriously..."[@shafer2007foundations 137] The first reason McDowell can't "take naive realism seriously" is that he finds one sort of motivational internalism absurd. He points to a "worry about how something that is brutely *there* could nevertheless stand in an internal relation to some exercise of human sensibility."[@shafer2007foundations  143]  In this McDowell agrees with Mackie: the "central doctrine of European moral philosophy" is a mistake;[@mackie] it is wrong to think that some things *merit* certain responses by virtue of what they are and what we are. (McDowell's worry is akin to Mackie's bewilderment over the notion that "to-be-pursuedness" is built into things.) A second worry is that the doctrine of objective value, where normative facts are primary qualities of nature, has been discredited or outmoded by modern science. The modern scientific picture of nature is "disenchanted" from such instrinsic values as meaning and morality. He says, "The most striking occurence in the history of thought between Aristotle and ourselves is the rise of modern science."[@mcdowell1998two 174] This objection McDowell shares with Gibbard and Blackburn. \
\
\
11. McDowell's view here is comprehensible in light of his broader project of anti-metaphysics, therapeutic philosophy, constructivism, and so on. \
\
Yet McDowell does not conclude (as many do), that therefore values are merely subjective; he does not conclude that there is no such thing as natural normativity. McDowell's anti-dualist position here (as elswhere!) is liable to puzzle or frustrate some philosophers. He is not a realist; but he is not an anti-realist. He is an "anti-anti-realist". McDowell is always fighting on two fronts, attacking a position without thereby supporting its apparent opposite. (Similarly, in *Mind and World* he attempts to dissolve the "vacillation" between naive empirical realism and "Rampont Platonism".)  It may be worthwhile to make the contextual observation that McDowell's position here reflects his broader project of *dissolving dualisms*. He says he is influenced by two main sources: the "Socratic tradition" and Wittgenstein.[@mcdowell1998mindvalue, preface] From the Socratic tradition he draws a way of thinking in which dualisms do not even arise. And from the later Wittgenstein he draws a way of doing "therapeutic" philosophy[@mcdowell2008critics] -- philosophy that \'91leaves everything as it is\'92^[Wittgenstein, *Philosophical Investigations.* Section 124.]. That is, McDowell believes many philosophical puzzles arise not from puzzling reality but from errors in *our own thinking*, so we need "therapy": dualisms need to be *exorcized*. \
\
It makes sense that McDowell disputes both Foot's brand of moral realism and also its apparent opposite, subjectivism and anti-realism. But what is the alternative to the apparently exhaustive dualism of seeing values (or norms) as *either* facts of nature like primary qualities *or* unreal, illusory, and purely subjective. His answer is that values are "secondary qualities" or "dispositional properties" of nature. His essay "Values and Secondary Qualities" argues that values are like colors and unlike shapes.[@mcdowell2007values. I shall cite this anthology. The essay is also printed in @mcdowell1998mindvalue, chapter 7.] We might paraphrase this thesis by saying that "natural normativities" are qualities *in the world* (not just in our heads) but they are not Lockean "primary qualities." They are, rather, Lockean secondary qualities. \
\
Yet McDowell also disagrees with the opposite extreme of Foot's view, as represented by those (such as J.L. Mackie, Alan Gibbard, and Simon Blackburn) who believe that normativity is "projected" by philosophers and scientists onto the natural facts. Mackie's error theory gets right the common sense view that "ordinary evaluative thought [is] a matter of sensitivity to aspects of the world."[@shafer2007foundations 137] Secondary qualities are "subjective" in that they cannot be adequately conceived "except in terms of certain subjective states"[@shafer2007foundations  139] but not in that they are therefore illusory. A secondary quality is not "a mere figment of the subjective state that purports to be an experience of it."[@shafer2007foundations  139] \
\
He says a secondary property ascription is true "in virtue of the object's disposition to present a certain sort of perceptual appearance."[@shafer2007foundations  138] Experience of secondary qualities is a (sense) perceptual experience. This a Lockean doctrine. Redness is not *merely* a microscopic texture property (say, the texture that scatters all light waves except red ones) because microscopic textures don't *look red* and things that *look red* appear so to observers with no knowledge of such textures. \
\
Colors are response-dependent, while other properties (say, 'squareness') are response-independent. Color-properties must be defined partly by their "objective" or response-independent aspects and partly phenomenologically. Shape-properties, by contrast, can be defined by their objective or mind-independent aspects. It makes no sense to speak of what *redness is* apart from perceptions of red *in perceivers*. Similarly, it makes no sense to speak of "dangerousness" apart from a subject who is potentially vulnerable. So, perhaps, it also makes no sense to speak of "rightness" apart from a subject who potentially judges the value of a thing. \
\
Yet by the same token right and wrong are not *purely* invented. The property of "being such as to look red" may or may not be *have ever been perceived as red* by any observer (if, for example, the appropriate conditions have never obtained). So a Lockean secondary quality may be response-independent in some sense, but it is not *redness as such*. It is the dispositional property that is disposed to present us with a appearance of a particular phenomenal character. So values (like colors) are dispositional properties. \
\
Goodness, badness, and other values are therefore grounded in "second nature."[@mcdowell1998two 188 and following.] The space of reasons in which our rational capacities operate makes us sensibile to those dispositional properties of primary nature which become, for us, values such as goodness and badness. We will explore McDowell's view of second nature a bit more in a later chapter. Suffice it for now that "second nature" is a distinctly human phenomenon. We partially re-enchant nature by bringing primary facts into the space of reasons when they weren't there before. \
\
McDowell, recall, thinks that values are secondary qualities of the world but not primary. This belief is consistent with his solution to the mind-body problem that even primary qualities are not given to us in experience without the involvement of spontaneous conceptual capacities. He assumes that nature -- primary nature -- is bald nature, disenchanted from values, teloi, and other esoterica. Yet to posit humanity, especially human rationality, as merely mechanical would be to deny our rationality. So he posits the space of reasons. Humanity exists in a space of reasons where we recognize reasons for belief and reasons for action. We are initiated into a Space of reasons by education, formation, cultivation (or *Bildung*).^[Bildung=formation, education; bild=form, image.]\
\
McDowell's fundamental solution to the mind-body problem in general is that the world given in experience is engaging both receptive and spontaneous capacities. We have to wonder about the implications of the \'93new interpretation of human experience\'94\'97and the location of the rational being within nature. McDowell does wonder about this, introducing the concept of second nature. Nature (we presume) is disenchanted. Human beings are natural\'97they exist within the disenchanted space of law. Yet, ex hypothesi the human being has (simultaneously) the capacity for spontaneous answerability to rational relations, which exist in a sui generis space of reason. These seem irreconcilable. McDowell here invokes Aristotle\'92s notion of ethics, by which he hopes to rethink our conception of human nature and nature as a whole. He says, \'93the rethinking requires a different conception of actualizations of our nature.\'94[@mcdowell1996mind 77] Second nature is that space in which human beings are initiated into particular ways of behaving and knowing.  \
\
Practical wisdom is a virtue that the young human being does not have, and the ethical demands of practical wisdom are not even perceptible to her. But she has the potential (within her nature) to develop the answerability to them. And ethical thinking is inculcated in a young person, and then later examined, but only examined from within ethical thinking.  Human beings are intelligibly initiated into this stretch of the space of reasons by ethical upbringing (Bildung) which instills the appropriate shape in their lives. So initiated, practically wise behavior is not just a new kind of behavior but the maturation and development of a new kind of faculty in the human animal. The circularity of this inculcation and new second natural faculty is not accidental: Since practical wisdom is responsive to reasons, it becomes a prototype \'93for the\'85faculty that enables us to recognize and create \'85 intelligibility.\'94[@mcdowell1996mind 79] "[The ethical demands of reason] are essentially within reach of human beings. So practical wisdom is second nature to its possessors.\'94[@mcdowell1996mind 84]r\
\
\
12. The problems with McDowell's view are these: (1) McDowell's concept of nature is incoherent. It is both restricted and unrestricted. My view is superior in explicitly adopting an unrestricted conception and paying the conceptual price. (2) McDowell's concept of science is too crassly restrictive; although he disputes the "philistene scientism" of his opponents, he seems to me to endorse just enough philistene scientism to deserve his own criticism. He is a scietific realist on one page and anti-realist on another. And (3) there do seem to be primary qualities of nature such as "danger" and "safe" that are relational and actionable like moral qualities such as good and bad. McDowell's own example admits this but he shies away from the obvious conclusion.\
\
\
### Criticism of McDowell \
\
13. It is *not* a problem that McDowell's view is a brand of idealism -- not a problem along naturalistic lines, since idealism can be naturalism, as Fink explains.\
\
Both McDowell and Foot reject subjectivism; morality is not merely invented. So their disagreements, while serious, must be seen as an internecine disagreement. \
\
Nevertheless, I think McDowell's ingenious alternative to "empirical naturalism" or "strict naturalism" is flawed. So, before I defend my own version of Footian realism, I would like to point out two or three aspects of the inadequacy of McDowell's constructivist alternative. \
\
### Dilemma Unrestricted or Restricted 'nature'?\
\
McDowell faces a dilemma. He must choose between two incompatible definitions of nature, and he wants both. On the one hand, he wants the term 'nature' to analytically exclude anything falling under the description of ' supernatural'; on the other hand, he most emphatically does *not* want to exclude "second nature" of human thought and experience in the space of reasons. But he can't have what he wants, at least, not without further argumentation. He has merely asserted (but not earned the conceptual rights) to his conception of nature. @fink expertly exposes McDowell's sleight of hand on this issue. To draw out the critique of McDowell that Fink and I share in common, I will have to present the details of his article. \
\
The first point, from Fink, picks up McDowell's statement that "Mrs Foot\'92s writings do not pay much attention to the concept of nature in its own right". The conversations about 'two sorts of naturalism' or different kinds of 'ethical naturalism' are, after all, conversations about nature. What is 'nature?' Some might be impatient with such digressions, insisting that we can resolve this sticky business by stipulation. But Fink disagrees:\
\
>This is a terminological issue, but it is not easy to resolve simply by choosing one\'92s definition of \'91nature\'92 and then sticking to it. No account of naturalism should forget the fact that \'91nature\'92 is, as Raymond Williams puts it, \'91perhaps the most complex word in the language\'92 (Williams 1981: 184), or as Hume puts it, a word \'91than which there is none more ambiguous and equivocal\'92 (THN: III.I.II.). In this section I shall try to give a somewhat systematic overview of some of this complexity that simply cannot be reduced by philosophical fiat...Indeed, it is a deep root of ambiguity that we can talk about the nature of art, law, language, culture, morality, normativity, history, civilization, spirit, mind, God, or nothingness even if we otherwise regard these as non-natural, that is, as not belonging to nature as a realm. There is no contradiction in talking about the nature of the unnatural, the super-natural, or the non-natural, just as it is an open question what the nature of the natural is.[@fink 206]\
\
And Fink is right. If the error of Foot's critics lies in a deeply-held, barely articulated belief that some concept "nature" cannot include any normative content, then the only thing for it is to thematize the concept of nature, make such beliefs explicit, and subject them to scrutiny. \
\
To see the dilemma McDowell faces, consider that there are at least two kinds of conceptions of nature: (1) "Restricted nature" picks out some subset of all things that are natural, leaving everything else 'non-natural', unnatural, or supernatural. Fink provides a list of eight different intuitive ways of contrasting (a restricted conception of) nature with what is non-natural. For instance, 'nature' could mean the world unaffected by human intervention (e.g., the arrangement of trees in the Yukon is natural) or "the empirical world as opposed to the intelligible world of the abstract, logical, or mathematical" (e.g., formal sciences contrast with sciences of nature.) All of these eight contrast with the (2) unrestricted nature. "Unrestricted nature" is just a multisyllabic synonym for "all." It leaves nothing out. This is the ninth option Fink summarizes as follows:\
\
>Such a ninth conception of nature would be an unrestricted conception. It would express the idea that there is one world only, and that that world is the realm of nature, which is taken to include the cultural, artificial, mental, abstract and whatever else there may prove to be. There are no realms above or beyond nature. To be is to be in nature and to be in continuity with everything else in nature. Even the greatest and deepest differences are differences within nature rather than differences between nature and something else.[@fink 206]\
\
With these distinctions in hand, we can observe a crucial point that no one philosophical view has copyright on the term 'naturalism.' For example, classical materialism is perhaps a paradigmatic form of 'naturalism'.[@sellars1927naturalism] By Fink's lights, classical materialism is a form a restricted naturalism for it affirms that whatever is material is part of nature, and so that the label 'not-natural' applies to whatever is not material (or not obviously material, such as ghosts, souls, and fairies). But classical materialism is not the *only* form of restricted nature. Rather, *the idealist, too, can rightly lay claim to the title of naturalism* -- and not in a "Pickwickian" sense. \
\
To see why idealism is a form of restricted naturalism, Fink takes a highly informative detour to analyze Plato's *Laws*. There he finds a Greek trichotomy between events that come about by nature (*physis*), chance, and art. 'Nature' and 'chance' explain why plants grow, why the sun moves, and so on. 'Art' explains why houses have roofs, why humans wear clothes, and anything else that we do and that nature and chance could *not* have done. The "natural" pair in this trichotomy consists of the first two: that which comes about, so to speak, on its own, *prior to* and *independent of* intelligent intervenion from humans or gods. This conception of nature excludes not only the supernatural but also the cultural, the fictional or imaginative, and so on. The Athenian does not accept this "dangerous" conception of nature. Rather, he argues that "soul is necessarily prior in origin to things which belong to body, seeing that soul is older than body."[@plato, *Laws* 891cff] Fink comments on this passage: \
\
>The Athenian doesn't just leave the concept physis to the \'91men of science\'92. He does not first accept their conception of nature and then confront them with the claim that there is something extra-natural\'97the soul or the gods\'97 which they have disregarded and which is in fact prior to nature. No. Like McDowell the Athenian is eager to have nature on his side. He therefore challenges the scientists' right to restrict the term \'91nature\'92 to the soulless, partly necessary and partly accidental combinations of the elements. \
\
The Athenian proves his desired point -- that soul is "older than" and prior to body -- by first defining 'soul' as self-movement, and the cause of motion in other things. Material bodies either do not move at all or they are moved by something else. Since all material things are either moved (by another moving thing) or unmoved, material things cannot be the first principles of motion. But since soul *is self-motion*, it is the first principle of motion. Or rather, the first *ensouled* body is able to move itself, and therefore to move other material things. \
\
Fink's comment is that "This, I take it, is pretty rampant Platonism but clearly presented as an account of the soul as natural becaus eprimary in existence... mind is prior to world."[@fink 215] This brings us back around to idealism as naturalism. If soul is the primary sense of nature, then body is "second nature"! Mind is the primary thing, the first thing, the paradigmatic thing, against which mere body is contrasted. \
\
We can now see the crucial point about 'naturalism.' Idealism and materialism turn out to be *identical* in one respect: they offer a "restricted conception of nature" and relegate to a "secondary" status everything that is not "natural" in the privileged sense. Idealism and materialism of course *contrast* -- indeed, *compete* -- in that they fight each other for the right to call *their* preferred side of the matter-form divide the *first* and *natural* side. Fink bolsters this point with a quotation from Aristotle showing that Aristotle is aware of the competition between the matter-form divide. "Some identify the nature or substance of a natural object with the immediate constituent... e.g., wood is the 'nature' of the bed... [others] that 'nature' is the shape or form."[@fink 216, quoting from @aristotle *Physics*: 2, 1 (192b7ff)] His comment on this passage is:\
\
>Like in Plato, we find here both a definition of the word \'91nature\'92 (an inner source or cause of being moved and being at rest) and two competing conceptions of what that source is, namely matter and form (the material and the formal cause in Aristotle\'92s sense). Aristotle himself finds it most satisfying to regard the formal (and the teleological or final) cause as the nature of x. \
\
\
The point of these reflections is that McDowell has argued persuasively that we must return return to the unrestricted conception of nature. \
\
### Neither restricted sort of nature\
\
The restricted conceptions of nature (materialism and idealism) are in ideological battle; some philosophers are willing to pick a side and battle it out with the other side. The idealist can be guilty of presenting the spiritual or conceptual version of nature as absolute. McDowell sees the same question-begging in what he calls "philistine scientism".[@mcdowell1979virtue 346] As Fink summarizes: \
\
>McDowell has convincingly shown that what Bernard Williams calls the absolute conception of reality is merely restricted, bald naturalism ideologically presented as absolute (MVR: 112\'9631, esp. sect. 5).[@fink 219]\
\
### Not unrestricted\
Nevertheless, McDowell is of two minds. He rejects the restricted conceptions of nature offered him by the philistine scientism and by Kantian idealism. The only remaining route is an unrestricted conception of nature. Fink continues:\
\
>Nothing less than a naturalism that deserves to be presented as absolute could help break the spell of bald naturalism without merely replacing one restricted sort of naturalism with another and thus keeping the oscillations going.[@fink 219\}\
\
Culture, art, human intervention, rationality, and so on are part of the all. Fink quotes Dewey to make this point: \
\
>Mountain peaks do not float unsupported; they do not even just rest upon the earth. They *are* the earth in one of its manifest operations. It is the business of those who are concerned with the theory of the earth, geographers and geologists, to make this fact evident, in its various implications. The theorist who would deal philosophically with fine art has a like task to accomplish. (Dewey 1958: 3\'964, italics in original)\
>On this conception the aesthetical (and the ethical) are not independent of nature, but they are not somehow based on nature or supervening on it either; rather, they simply are nature in some of its manifest operations. To think otherwise is both to mystify the aesthetical (and ethical) and to trivialize nature. The man- made, the artificial, the cultural, the historical, the ethical, the normative, the mental, the logical, the abstract, the mysterious, the extraordinary, are all examples of ways of being natural rather than examples of ways of being non- natural. Nature is never *mere* nature. That which is *more* than *mere* is nature, too.[@fink 217]\
\
Where the materialist and idealist are fighting over the definition of primary nature, the unrestricted conception refuses to fight, instead embracing both body and mind, brain and consciousness, matter and form, in a comprehensive view. While this has its attractions, the cost, however, is that one no longer has the right to criticize opponents on the basis of their positing something real over and above nature -- such a criticism is meaningless once we have defined 'real over and above nature' as a contradiction in terms. This cost McDowell does not wish to pay. \
\
McDowell must pick sides, but he has not allowed himself to pick sides. He rejects one sort of idealism[Cf. @mcdowell1996mind. He wants to dissolve the prejudice that we must be either Kantian transcendental idealists or reductive empiricists.] and rejects one sort of empiricism. Therefore, by default, it is a necessary consequence that he embraces the unrestricted conception of nature. \
\
Instead of explicitly admitting that he embraces the unrestricted conception without qualification, he puts the ball in one cup and then moves it around to the other side, pretending the ball was in the other cup all along. He keeps his conception of nature restricted (anti-supernatural) while *calling* in unrestricted (neither idealist nor physicalist). McDowell as a hero of anti-dualism has allowed himself merely to *name and claim* an unrestricted conception of nature while fully developing and endorsing a restricted conception of nature. \
\
\
### Sellars Example\
\
To make the point even more clear, compare McDowell's refusal to pick sides with Sellars' example of the same. Sellars provides a specimen of such doublespeak in almost platonic purity: \
\
>I mean that naturalism takes nature in a definite way as identical with reality, as self-sufficient and as the whole of reality. And by nature is meant the space-time-causal system which is studied by science and in which our lives are passed.[@sellars1927naturalism 217]\
\
The first sentence explicitly endorses an unrestricted conception of nature. The second sentence invisibly and secretly slides the ball into the other cup, explictly endorsing an incompatible restricted conception of nature. The second sentence merely *assumes* that the "space-time-causal system which is studied by science and in which our lives are passed" is "identical with reality". The second sentence asserts: "Nature is all there is!" with an exclamation point and a loud voice. But nobody (not idealists or supernaturalists) dispute that "Nature (unrestricted nature) is all there is"; they only dispute the implicit assumption, that the space-time-causal-system is all there is.\
\
### Conclusion\
\
I conclude that, despite their differences, McDowell shares with Mackie and other subjectivists radically reductive, disenchanted, Laplacian picture of material nature as a manifold of bald descriptive facts. The richer -- and more scientific -- unrestricted conception of nature is the one Foot (and MacIntyre) can help us to recover. McDowell merely asserts, without additional argument, the common prejudice that "modern science" somehow disenchants nature, when in fact the "partial re-enchantment" he himself endeavors to recover is already present *within modern science*. \
\
James Barham captures the dualism into which McDowell unwitting falls: \
\
>the philosophical literature tends to work with a scientifically outdated image of living things as rigid \'93machines.\'94 This results in a picture in which only human beings (or at most the higher animals) can be properly ascribed purposes and agency in the full normative sense. From this perspective, we appear to be faced with an unappealing choice between eliminating teleology and normativity from our picture of nature altogether and understanding these phenomena as they are manifested in our own human form of life as floating free from any grounding in the natural world.[@barham2011 1]\
\
\
### Values as primary qualities\
\
A second critique is that McDowell himself *does* allow that "values" can be primary qualities in nature. The theory of danger also helps McDowell in his conclusion deny that his view is a variant of "projectivism." The "epistemology of danger" that arises from McDowell's "theory of danger"[@shafer2007foundations  142-3] helps explain moral epistemology. This is McDowell's own example but he does not seem to notice that it can be used against his thesis. If "danger" is a Lockean primary quality, then "desirable" might be as well. His theory of "danger" is this: Just as there is *something* about red things *themselves* that makes them give us redness experiences, likwise there is something about the dangerous animal itself that gives us fear experiences. That quality may not be *the form of red* or *the form of danger*, but it is also not *nothing.* The "theory of danger" is intended to capture this "something" with the important notion of *merit*. Red objects *just appear as red* to us under the proper circumstances. They *just do* dispose us to have red experiences. But dangerous objects *merit* appearing fearful and dangerous. They *merit* that we have a fear experience. To describe a bear (say) as "dangerous" to rabbits is to say something about bears and about rabbits in their context on planet earth. The rabbit need not engage in concept-use or perceptual judgment -- seeing the bear *as dangerous* -- rather the rabbit merely needs the instincts and perceptial capacities to see the bear. His response is not reducible to a response to the bear's size or fur or any other obvious empirical quality; the rabbit is responding to the danger. Likewise, when we see certain kinds of food as "disgusting" (rotten banana peels, say) we need to assume that we are projecting disgust onto the food; it is more plausible, by McDowell's own lights, that we are being sensitive to what such foods *merit*, given the kind of foods they are and the kind of animals we are.\
\
### Scientific realism?\
\
McDowell wants to denigrate one kind of scientific realism (say, realism about evaluative judgments of health and sickness) while endorsing another kind of scientific realism (about shapes, sizes, weights, and other primary qualities.) That is, he denigrates the desire to find goodness in (primary) nature as a kind of neurosis or anxiety arising from the philosophical vertigo we experience upon becoming inculcated with "the scientific worldview." But if there is such a thing as "the scientific worldview" -- the best thinking about the best deliverances of our best sciences -- then it includes the deliverances of biology. It is hard to be asked to reject "science" (scientific knowledge from biology) on behalf of "science" (scientific knowledge from physics). One begins to suspect that the request is that we reject genuinely scientific knowledge from biology on behalf of philosophical materialism, which wields the word 'science' as a bludgeon with which to beat its ideological opponents. McDowell acknowledges that his critics will criticize him for failing to live up to "philistine scientism" and yet criticizes the Footian picture for philistine scientism\
\
\
### Toner's solution\
\
>I do not presume to have achieved anything in the neighborhood of a demonstration of MacIntyre\'92s, or even of a broadly MacIntyrean, naturalism. I have tried only to show what an Aristotelian naturalism, which takes human nature as normative (such that to be morally good is to perfect one\'92s nature), would need to say; and to show that, among the main forms of "updated" Aristotelian naturalism on offer, something along the lines articulated by MacIntyre comes closest to saying it. Although I have tried to anticipate and turn aside some important objections, whether the MacIntyrean sort of naturalism is acceptable ultimately depends on answers to some rather large questions involving the nature of rationality (for example, whether it is tradition-constituted in something like the way MacIntyre says).[@toner2008sorts 248]\
\
Since we have already tried \
\
### My solution\
\
\
\
}