{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Chris Toner argues that the brands of naturalism espoused by Thompson, Hursthouse, and Foot -- the same sort I have defended above -- cannot adequately respond to a criticism McDowell (among others) have pressed. Toner presents four criteria that \'93naturalism must deliver if it is to support a revived Aristotelian virtue ethics\'85\'94[@toner2008sorts 222]  \
\
1. Natural norms must be intrinsically able to motivate the bearer of the nature. \uc0\u8232 \
\
The "natural norm" must be intrinsically able to motivate: desires that *do* motivate us satisfy this requirement. However, unless there is some "supervising principle" that coordinates desires (suppressing some, elevating others) the desires themselves seem to lead us to a sub-moral life; and the addition of such a supervising principle makes the theory no longer naturalistic. \
\
2. Natural norms must be intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of the nature. \
\
The natural norm must be something that justifies itself, either to all rational agents as such or to all moral agents. The norm need not, Toner admits, automatically persuade a Callicles to repent of his wickedness. However, it must be able to motivate. \
\
>This is why I say \'91\'91intrinsically able to motivate or justify\'92\'92 rather than \'91\'91intrinsically motivating or justifying\'92\'92: the natural norm is such that it can motivate or convince persons, provided they are not in too dysfunctional a state. In the same way a rose is such as to be intrinsically able to convince us of its being red. Its failure actually to do so in my case because I am color-blind or jaundiced does not impugn this intrinsic ability. Natural norms can motivate and convince because they are neither \'91\'91mere facts\'92\'92 about the way a given species does go on nor \'91\'91brute desires\'92\'92 a given species happens to have as a result of its evolutionary history.[@toner2008sorts 235]\
\
Micah Lott calls this the "authority-of-nature challenge"^[In @lott2012moral 770]. "The challenge depends on an apparent gap between what naturally good for us qua human beings (=the normal) and what has a claim upon our reason (=the normative)." Natural norms are either "normal" (i.e., natural) or "normative" (i.e., binding, authoritative, etc.)\uc0\u8232 \
\
3. Natural norms must be anchored in and express universal human nature. \
\
\
\
\
4. First and second nature must be related so that the second is a natural outgrowth of the first, and so that that in our given makeup is (first) natural which does tend toward an ethically mature second nature. \
\
\
\
\
8. Another might object that generics about human nature or the human life-form is not ethically relevant, since one is able, by virtue of rationality, to transcend one's nature. The practical point of view is not "scientific", even if it is broadly "naturalistic."\
9. The initial response to this objection is that some such properties are ethically relevant while some are not, and that it takes practical wisdom itself to recognize which ones are which. The scientific point of view is not the point of view *from within* the space of law but *about* the space of law *from within* the space of reasons. \
9. McDowell urges this point against "Thompsonian" and Footian naturalism. He thematizes the concept of 'nature' itself. \
10. For McDowell, nature consists of Lockean primary qualities, which are response-independent as well as dispositional properties which are response-dependent. "Values" are the latter sort. There is no such thing as "to-be-pursuedness" existing as a Lockean primary quality in first nature. Nevertheless, values are not merely subjective fantasy. They are intersubjective, grounded in a form of life, grounded in our rationality itself. \
11. McDowell's view here is comprehensible in light of his broader project of anti-metaphysics, therapeutic philosophy, constructivism, and so on. \
12. The problems with McDowell's view are these: (1) McDowell's concept of nature is incoherent. It is both restricted and unrestricted. My view is superior in explicitly adopting an unrestricted conception and paying the conceptual price. (2) McDowell's concept of science is too crassly restrictive; although he disputes the "philistene scientism" of his opponents, he seems to me to endorse just enough philistene scientism to deserve his own criticism. He is a scietific realist on one page and anti-realist on another. And (3) there do seem to be primary qualities of nature such as "danger" and "safe" that are relational and actionable like moral qualities such as good and bad. McDowell's own example admits this but he shies away from the obvious conclusion.\
13. It is *not* a problem that McDowell's view is a brand of idealism -- not a problem along naturalistic lines, since idealism can be naturalism, as Fink explains. }