{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;
\f3\ftech\fcharset77 Symbol;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red53\green53\blue53;\red220\green161\blue13;\red20\green20\blue20;
\red24\green147\blue14;\red15\green52\blue169;\red67\green67\blue67;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{check\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u10003 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid5}
{\list\listtemplateid6\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid501\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid6}
{\list\listtemplateid7\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid601\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid7}
{\list\listtemplateid8\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid701\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid8}
{\list\listtemplateid9\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid801\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid9}
{\list\listtemplateid10\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid901\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid10}
{\list\listtemplateid11\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1001\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid11}
{\list\listtemplateid12\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1101\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid12}
{\list\listtemplateid13\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1201\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid13}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}{\listoverride\listid6\listoverridecount0\ls6}{\listoverride\listid7\listoverridecount0\ls7}{\listoverride\listid8\listoverridecount0\ls8}{\listoverride\listid9\listoverridecount0\ls9}{\listoverride\listid10\listoverridecount0\ls10}{\listoverride\listid11\listoverridecount0\ls11}{\listoverride\listid12\listoverridecount0\ls12}{\listoverride\listid13\listoverridecount0\ls13}}
\deftab560
\pard\pardeftab560\sa40\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 1. In the evolutioarny no human nature objections in chapter 3, put the responses after each statement of the objection. That will make the discussion flow better. \
2. In the same section, mention that philosophers fall into three camps regarding the relation between evolution and morality: debunkers think the facts of evolution somehow undermine the objective purport of morality; underwriters think that the facts of evolution actually underwrite the objective purport of morality; the third group just denies that evolutionary theory has much to contribute to morality \'97 they are separate domains with their own principles, rules, and standards of justification. They may relate in some way but not in a straightforward relationship of undermining or underwriting one or the other. \
3. Google search and find Lott, Frey, and all the other recent stuff on virtue ethics.\
4. Read Adams and see what I can cull. Probably read Hurka in this connection as well. 
\b \
5. For developments and criticism of Foot's view: 
\f1\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
See Chrisoula Andreou, \'91\'91Getting On In a Varied World,\'92\'92 Social Theory and Practice Vol. 32, 2006 and Candace Volger, \'91\'91Modern Moral Philosophy Again: Isolating the Promulgation Problem,\'92\'92 Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 2006. See also Ron Sandler, \'91\'91What Makes a Character Trait a Virtue?\'92\'92, Journal of Value Inquiry, Vol. 39, Nos. 3\'964 (2005). \
# In chapter 6, change all the McDowell quotations and page numbers from the anthology version to the article or book version. This should only take about 20 minutes. \
# Change all the "I wills" to "I shalls" and "we will" to "we shall"\
# Again, \

\f0\b \cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
Dissertation notes\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \'93While neo-Darwinian evolutionary theory does soundly reject any appeal to teleology in the process of evolution itself, there is a large literature in contemporary philosophy of biology defending the legitimacy of employing teleological concepts in connection with adaptations.\'94[@sepmoralitybiology]
\fs28 \cf0 \

\fs24 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Read Fitzpatrick\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \
\
=========Chapter 4==========\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 He refers to Aristotle an view should be he refers to an Aristotelian view.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Fix Mickie to JL Mackie or make consistent\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 McDowell thinks some things don't merit responses-- but he himself gives an example with danger.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
this a lockean doctrine. should be this is a lockean doctrine.\
\
The whole McDowell discussion is choppy. There is repetition when I say \'93it may make sense to step back and make the contextual point\'94. First make the point, then step back and explain it. Then return to the point.\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Quine science itself teaches blah blah blah-- pick on Quine.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
Connect Macintyre's assertion that we are dependent rational animals, with the capacities of animality, and the capacities of rationality.\
\
\
Remove repetition on toners for  criteria.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 For example, microbial organisms occupying the human body especially the stomach intestines and other parts of the digestive system, outweigh the number of brain cells in the average adult human brain.\
\
Humans and other mammals could not survive on the earth without the number of trees in the global ecosystem. Trees constitute about 90% of the biomass on the planet. Bracket citation.\
\
Even seemingly incidental organisms are essential for human life. those that are not central in any direct way to human life or human endeavors, such as ocean plankton, form the base of the food chain. If by some catastrophe all of the ocean plankton were destroyed, or a sufficient percentage of it, the entire ecosystem would eventually collapse, as fish died birds that feed on the fish died, plants and other animals that depend on those birds died, and eventually human farm animals died.\
\
The order of objective value, although I shall not use the phrase often, the order of objective value is the order of biological life.\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 ---\
Chapter 4\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
.\
\
Attempt to cite our nature.\
\
say a bit more about morality immorality prison justice system.\
\
Argue that being animal, we are mortal. All organic life is more toll.\
\
Mention chromosomal disorders," a medical textbook. \
\
The difference of human speech is not obvious to infant humans, who learned by imitation words just as well as they learn tweets barks and growls. \
\
Mention religion earlier.\
\
Put the hall Dane quote and all the speech paragraphs together, earlier when I compare rationality to animality.\
\
I preferred to make it indelibly clear and explicit that human nature is not to be rational but to be practically rational, because all people of all cultures and of all intelligence quotient's engage in practical reasoning and deliberation where only a relative minority engage in that kind of abstract reflection that characterizes science, theology, mathematics, metaphysics, ethics, and so on. \
\
Morning delete delete last two words. Practical reason reason. Try to introduce those together.\
\
Rationality practical practical action fund this is a beauty scientific this is not. Save this comment for a more appropriate setting. Also put Thompson on the na\'efve view of action, and Anscot\
\
I need a fuller discussion of potentiality and maturity. Russell misunderstands the nature of generics. If it's the alien anthropologist where to study 12-year-olds and come to all sorts of conclusions about humanity in general, their conclusions would be a week since their sample with the week. Feeling anthropologist would need to look at but sure human beings 25 to 55. Younger than that it would noticed that certain behaviors and lack of brain development make for uncharacteristic behavior. Jan that they would notice illness people slowing down,. Similarly they would have to find some way to differentiate between the people in prison and the people who are running art galleries.\
\
There is an objection to the very notion of a nature. Which is really a reprisal have an objection from the last semester question.\
\
YouTube who exemplifies the same nature of being a potential he practical rational animal. Not Plural.\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 The couch  potato relieves himself.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\
\
\
The Bernard Williams "needs to be strengthened. Trimmed at the front. I think there are some typos.\
\
Chapter 4. This is consistent with John McDowells solution on mind-body problem, there some repetition there\
\
There is a repetition about McDowells fundamental problem or solution to the mind-body problem\
\
Before I defend my own foot version. Change that because I have already defend. Also there was another error right before that.\
\
We need to assume should be we need not soon.\
\
He has asserted but not earned the conceptual rights to his conception of the church. Should say but has not burned the conceptual rights to his definition of nature.\
\
Instead of saying resolve the sticky issue if you Leeshan, say clean up.\
\
Where as a row of trees on the boardwalk is or not. Whereas formal sciences such as math mathematics calculus geometry are not on.\
\
Intelligent intervention from man or not.\
\
In a highly interesting Plato has the Athenian stranger reject this definition of nature.\
\
Restricted naturalists when they defined their own view has naturalism, simply banking question.\
\
Unrestricted naturalism therefore has this great attraction, that one can win the war by bowing out of the war. One can embrace both sides of matter and form in a synoptic view. Unrestricted naturalism however has this great cost, one can no longer exclude ones opponents as non-naturalists. One cannot called one's opponent's supernaturalist a, etc. . That kind of rhetoric is the kind of rhetoric that the restricted conception of nature empiricist can use to beg the question against his opponents, empirical triumphalism, unearned moral superiority that scoffs at all those who don't see that I am right because I am right.\
\
McDowell has rejected the both restriction restricted conceptions of nature, therefore has chosen the unrestricted definition of nature by default. But then he explicitly project the unrestricted conception of nature.  Perhaps he means that nature itself is a Mistry but even then we cannot say in advance if the contents of. Bucks are indeed a Mistry then we cannot exclude in advance any hypotheses about what's in the box.\
\
This is the importance of my initial stipulation of methodological agnosticism. McDowelleian relaxed naturalism is incompatible with dogmatic atheism. It is only compatible with agnosticism, or theism.\
\
McDowell Rejects the restricted conception of nature offered by materialism. He even rejects the equation of this picture with "science". Maybe I can remove the part about aggressive materialism and how physicalism a satisfying at the very beginning of the dissertation and put it here.\
\
I think maybe this chapter should be it's own chapter. How would that work?\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
McDowelleian nature is both restricted and unrestricted . It is in a word, incoherent.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
The dualism into which McDowell unwitting calls, should be unwittingly.\
\
\
There's a word missing when I talk about what is good for my family to earn less highway Joe's. In chapter 6 virtue and reason.\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2  Widmeyer the wisdom in the moderation and the wisdom in the Kerge. Courage.\
\
But the second response to the worry that when this be other completely versus amount virtuous, is that we do it my personal purchase peoples. Remarkably virtuous people\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
Introduce John McDowells virtue and the reason essay. Right now it just says let's look at John McTell.\
\
Draw the connection between McDowells sensitivity and first house multi track.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 ==========\
Scientific ethics conjures a range of images , not all of them good.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 That we should make ethics continuous with science doesn't mean, in advance or automatically, that we should reduce ethics to a mere descriptive, debunked version of its former glory.\
\
That would be to assume a narrow definition of science and cram humanity into it. We can allow a full and robust vision of our own humanity and assume a definition of science broad enough to contain all of it.\
\
It might mean that we should expand science to be more humane, fruitful, value laden, and glorious than even it has ever been.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >And there is indeed much in Kant to suggest that, although he shares with Aristotle the view that we have not just one, but two principles of movement, in other respects his philosophical psychology is Humean. He seems committed to the view that our emotions or inclinations are no part of our rationality. They come from the non\uc0\u8208 rational, animal side of our nature; if they happen to prompt us to act in accordance with the judgements of reason about what ought to be done we are lucky; if they incline us against them we find life difficult, but their prompting us in the right direction is no mark or indication of their rationality. The emotions are not rational in any way.[@hursthouse1998virtue 109]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
>How very unlike the other animals human beings are when they endure agony, and risk their lives, for justice and truth, or are terrified by the prospect of university examinations; when they are ready to die for glory, but tremble at the prospect of humiliation. The emotion that in the other animals is essentially connected to physical self\uc0\u8208 preservation or preservation of the species can be transformed in human beings into an emotion connected with the preservation of what is 
\i \cf2 best
\i0 \cf2 , most worth preserving, in us and our species. And the correctness (or incorrectness) of our view of that is an aspect of our rationality.[@hursthouse1998virtue 111]\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >Another fault of Williams's predecessors and ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.oxfordscholarship.com.ezproxy.uky.edu/view/10.1093/0199247994.001.0001/acprof-9780199247998-bibliography-1#acprof-9780199247998-bibItem-124"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 1965}}) contemporaries was that, though concentrating on \'91the most general features of .\'a0.\'a0. evaluative language\'92, they failed to think about the fact that such language has to be taught, and thereby failed to think about moral education and upbringing. We are taught to use sentences which contain the words (equivalent to) \'91good\'92 and \'91evil\'92 and their cognates and species from a very early age, at the same time as we are taught how to conduct ourselves. And a central aspect of this teaching is the training of the emotions.[@hursthouse1998virtue 113]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >For the kind of discriminating detail which makes the vague remark into a plausible and illuminating thesis, the best source is still Aquinas, not just in 
\i \cf2 Summa Theologiae
\i0 \cf2  Ia2ae (QQ. 22\'9630) on \'91The Emotions\'92, but all through IIa2ae (QQ. 1\'96189) on hope, fear, despair, charity (
\i \cf2 caritas
\i0 \cf2 ), joy, hatred, 
\i \cf2 accidie
\i0 \cf2 , envy, anger, curiosity, etc. Descartes, in 
\i \cf2 The Passions of the Soul
\i0 \cf2 , gives a rather watered\uc0\u8208 down but still instructive version.[@hursthouse1998virtue chapter 5, footnote 2]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >It is, I think, true, that where Aristotle, and thereby the Aristotelians, have an edge over Kant (and, indeed, Hume) with respect to the moral significance of the emotions is in the account Aristotle gives us of human rationality, an account that allows the emotions to participate in reason and thereby play their proper role in the specification of full virtue. Much modern moral philosophy, deontological and utilitarian, has followed Kant, or Hume, rather than Aristotle, on human rationality, and thereby still suffers from the fault to which Anscombe drew attention back in 1958\'97it lacks \'91an adequate philosophy of psychology\'92.[@hursthouse1998virtue 119.]\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 -At the risk hidebound air. At the risk of hidebound error\
-add in the first section section about moral realism. Site the book The moral realism is a normative ethical position.  Site Maki who says that when you realize there is no objective value you feel like life is not worth living and nothing is worth doing. There's some clue hear that practical action is definitionally or conceptually constituted by a value judgment, or by and evaluate his attitude.\
-chapter 4: part of task should be part of our task.\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	} In footnote reword that phrase so it is not a question. Are we born from other humans?\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}Put  Second Hearst house Hursthouse earlier with foots quote about rationality.\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}The irrelevance objection repeats it self like seven times. Synthesize and make a comment that this objection is so important to take care to put it in a couple of different ways.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 The point I take it, chapter 4. Reduce or remove repetition.\
Put the paragraph of examples about we can imagine people doing what comes natural he somewhere else, in the social teleology section maybe?\
\
Dependence is as close to use "should be dependence is as close to us\
\
Change transition, and rational or rather the exception, not\
\
To discuss genetic disorder etc. Should be followed immediately by intentional actualization and just possession of a nature. Dispossession. \
\
Also delete or relocate the sentence about the old classificatory Schey\
\
Innocent babies born without brains are still potentially rational since they are human beings, and recognizably so \'96 they are not Eagles or Stardust are weeping Willows. They are simply defective in that brain of the parts of the brain necessary for the actuation of humor human form tragically did not arise. Thankfully we have a clean exclamation for this, and generics the generics are formal true is compatible with individual exceptions. Generics are not crassly empirical statistical universal judgments\
\
This helps us to rebut a playful job quote should be this helps us to Perry playful Jeff. Use a fencing metaphor. Explain that Russell meant we are driven by emotion, we are often irrational, in that we do things that are not good for us, we do things we know we are not good for us. We are forgetful, we neglect or better angels, etc. Which is all true. That most of us do not actualizer formants is sad but compatible with the truth of the generic. Maybe for instance that political context or natural following this incest real soon keep us from becoming who we truly are.\
\
Peter singer is someone who is not an evil person but whose philosophical thinking has falling into this mistake. \
\
Pre born human fetuses... Regardless of the niceties of personhood.\
\
Rephrase the tragedy bit to say we understand that they are in process mid development etc\
\
I say this is Fitzpatrick's worry. But that line needs to come before the response.\
\
Can I construct an analytical outline now?\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	1.	}Nature is normative, there are natural norms.\
{\listtext	2.	}Natural norms are expressible in generic propositions.\
{\listtext	3.	}Scientific realism is true. So there are natural kinds, generic fax, or formal.\
{\listtext	4.	}Generics also express functional facts, which are natural teleological facts.\
{\listtext	5.	}This teleology is scientific. \
{\listtext	6.	}These generics are true of all living things.\
{\listtext	7.	}Humans are living things so there are some generic for a few minutes.\
{\listtext	8.	}The generic that human beings are rational animals truth. \
{\listtext	9.	}That we are rational animals entails the presence of a bunch of properties, including some functional facts.\
{\listtext	10.	}Are function is at least on the face of it to become fully human, and to perform a characteristic works. We should not assume that we have one such work such as rational activity, because it may be that the function is to rationalize are, to the best. To make our body and our property and our clothing and so on rational.\
{\listtext	11.	}Virtues would be those qualities therefore that are formally part of being a rational animal and that is living a life of rational animals and becoming fully rational and fully mature.\
{\listtext	12.	}That is just with the new Aristotelians say.\
{\listtext	13.	}Virtus pertain to social, linguistic, intellectual, and practical activities, as per the analytic definition of practical rationality.\
{\listtext	14.	}Moderation is a virtue and his self regarding.\
{\listtext	15.	}Tolerance is a virtue and his other Re:, and helps us to tolerate differences and even mistakes in our fellow animals.\
{\listtext	16.	}All of the virtues are united within practical rationality, and so practical reason. Practical reason is what we are eating important sense. And practical reason does not separate from our inability. Animal. If it were, but McDowell would be right about a dualism, between humanity in nature. Air animal and culture. But he is not. Nature is unrestricted, which is agnostic.\
{\listtext	17.	}Practical reason is by definition the orientation to do good and avoid evil. But does not mean of course that we always do good or that we always aim to do things we know we're good. It means that the only reason we do things we know are bad, is in pursuit of some good. Unaliened apologist could learn this to if they were practical animals. So this truth is discoverable from within and from without the practical point of you. Practical reason is also objective, it interacts with the moral order, or practical order, or space of reasons as a whole.\
{\listtext	18.	}Practical wisdom is especially important because it blocks individual relativism, United the virtues, and perfects out nature even more than intellectual wisdoms. but is practical wisdom itself culturally relative? Yes and no. To see that it is not relative requires one to be in the proper culture. In the wrong culture, one night mistakenly believe that it is relative. This is a paradox that cannot be resolved blithely. McIntyre does probably the best job of attempting to resolve it. This kind of practical wisdom is compatible with affirming the value of virtue tolerance and moral objectivity.\
{\listtext	19.	}Our human function is minimally, to become fully human, but must include some knowledge. What knowledge? At the very minimum, a knowledge of our human telos. \
{\listtext	20.	}Our end is death. Individually. The end of our species is extinction. Is there any point to becoming virtuous, is there any point to becoming human? There seems to be. This is a matter of some faith however.\
{\listtext	21.	}Two choices face us, remain human, become human, including excepting our mortality as a species. Or attempt to become transhumant or post-human, including space travel, genetic modification, and so on. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Schedule and Checklist: \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 March and April\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf2 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Write all chapter drafts\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Revise 1\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Revise 2\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Revise 3\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Revise 4\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Give to Bradshaw 1-2\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Give Garten 3\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Give Lindsay 3\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Give Don 3\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Make revisions to 3\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give to Bradshaw 3\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 Chapter 4 Normative Human Nature
\b0 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Garten 4\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Lindsay 4\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Don 4\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Listen and revise 4\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Make Garten etc. revisions to 4\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give to Bradshaw 4\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \
\
May
\b0 \cf2 \
Chapter 5 Virtue for Practical, Rational Animals\
Chapter 6 Virtue and Vice in Neo-Aristotelians \
Chapter 7 Practical Reasoning Social Animals\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls6\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Revise 5 virtue and vice (May)\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Listen and revise 5\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Garten 5\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Lindsay 5\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Don 5\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Revise 5 on Garten etc.\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give to Bradshaw 5\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Revise 6 virtue and reason (May)\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Listen and revise 6\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Garten 6\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Lindsay 6\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Don 6\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Revise 6 on Garten etc.\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give to Bradshaw 6\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Write 7 practical reason (May)\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Listen to 7\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Garten 7\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Lindsay 7\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Don 7\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Revise 7 on Garten etc.\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give to Bradshaw 7\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \
June
\b0 \cf2 \
Chapter 8 Practical Wisdom in Rational Animals\
Chapter 9 Flourishing for Practical, Rational Animals\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls7\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Write 8 practical wisdom (May)\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Listen to 8\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Garten 8 \
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Lindsay  8\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Don 8\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Write 9 flourishing (June)\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Listen to 9\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Garten 9\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Lindsay 9\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Don 9\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Research 4-8\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Write 9\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \
July\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls8\ilvl0
\b0 \cf2 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Chapter 10 Conclusion\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Chapter 1 revision\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \
August\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls9\ilvl0
\b0 \cf2 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Revise 1-5\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \
September
\b0 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls10\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Revise 6-10\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \
October
\b0 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls11\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Finalize 1-9\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Spell-check all\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Double check footnotes\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Listen to whole thing\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Pay for editor on eLance or Upwork\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Write abstract \
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Write front matter\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Find latex for front matter\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Create table of contents\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Acknowledgment \
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Index\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 November
\b0 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls12\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Submit to graduate school\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Submit to committee\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Print for graduate school\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Buy some Bourbon\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\'97\'97\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 maybe put \'93rise of virtue ethics\'94 sooner?\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 4\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >It is widely agreed that a virtue is a trait of character. Michael Slote says that an individual virtue is conceived as \'93an inner trait or disposition of the individual.\'94 Rosalind Hursthouse has attempted to articulate in detail what such a trait would consist in. The key point, in her view, seems to be that a virtue is not merely a disposition to act in certain characteristic ways. To be sure, a virtue does lead one to act in characteristic ways, but beyond this, it leads one to act in such ways for characteristic reasons and in a characteristic manner, to have certain characteristic attitudes and emotions, to be acute in detecting cases in which the virtue is at issue, and so on.[@copp2004morality 516]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Davidson, \'91How is Weakness of the Will Possible?\'92, in 
\i \cf2 Essays on Actions and Events
\i0 \cf2 , 21\'9642.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Jessica Peirce the Laplacian view of nature  683, Bioethics Text book\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Education design article cite from google alerts in chapters early. Put it in and find it online. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 After the Is-Ought Gap\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf2 The is-ought gap only arises in the minds of certain philosophers. In the minds of other philosophers, there is simply no problem. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 If the is-ought gap is a problem for you, then there is also a nature-normativity gap. You probably think all natural facts are non-normative and all normative \'93facts\'94 (or if you don\'92t believe in such facts, then normative *
\i \cf2 concepts*
\i0 \cf2 )  are non-factual. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 However, if the is-ought gap is not a problem for you, then there is a distinction (but not a gap) between natural descriptions and natural norms. You probably think some norms are descriptive (cars can drive) while some descriptions are normative (dogs have four legs. If a mother dog is pregnant, you can expect she ought to have a pup with four legs.)\
\
The is-ought gap was not a problem for many philosophers. It simply did not concern them. I mean \'93concern\'94 here in both senses; they did not pay it any attention and they did not feel great consternation over it. They didn\'92t bother with it and it didn\'92t bother them. \
\
Yet nowadays in analytic philosophy it is pretty widely felt that the is-ought gap is either insurmountable or that it is well nigh impossible to surmount. Hence, we are either forced to become normative non-naturalists (if we want to retain moral realism) or (if we want to retain naturalism) we are forced to go in for moral anti-realism. Simon Blackburn offers us a quasi-realist alternative that, to hear him tell the story, is virtually the only option if we are genuinely committed to naturalism but still pine for realism. \
\
What happened? If the is-ought gap arises only in the minds of certain philosophers, what thought precipitates it? If philosophers of ancient days did not bother with it, were they too daft to notice the problem or were they innocent of some confusion that plagues us? \
\
My goal in this brief discussion is to argue, with a very modest amount of rummaging through philosophical history, that the is-ought gap is no longer a problem. The historical anomaly that is the is-ought gap ought to be put to bed. We can preserve it, if we wish, in a glass case, as it were, for future philosophy students to observe and perhaps autopsy. But it should be did. \
\
It is not difficult to state, with some approximation, the time in history when the is-ought gap began to arise in force and cause great trouble among philosophers. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 The is-ought gap arises at precisely the moment (or just after) that a certain picture of nature arises in one\'92s mind. It is the picture of what John McDowel calls \'93bald nature.\'94 A dialogue between two character sin Andrei Tarkovsky\'92s film *Stalker* encapsulates this dreary picture quite well. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\i \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >WRITER: My dear! The world is absolutely dull, and that is why there\'92s neither telepathy, nor ghosts, nor flying saucers ... and there cannot be anything of the kind. Iron laws control the world and it\'92s intolerably boring. And these laws, alas, cannot be broken. They\'92re not able to. And believe not in the flying saucers. That would be all too interesting.\
>LADY: And what about the Bermuda triangle? Are you also going to argue that...?\
>WRITER: I am going to argue. There\'92s no Bermuda triangle. There\'92s a triangle ABC, which is even to a triangle A
\f3\i0 \uc0\u8242 
\f0\i B
\f3\i0 \uc0\u8242 
\f0\i C
\f3\i0 \uc0\u8242 
\f0\i . Do you feel, what a doleful boredom this statement rooms? However, in the middle ages it was interesting. In every home there was a house-spirit, in every church \'96 God... People were young! Now each fourth is an old man. Boring, my angel, oh how boring.
\i0 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
Now, some others call this picture Newtonian. However, Alvin Plantinga has persuasively inveighed against smearing Newton so. Newton was a dyed-in-the-wool supernaturalist who believed the laws of nature were the laws of nature\'92s God. Plantinga, like a gentlemen, offers an alternative which I think is the choicest name for this picture: Laplacian nature. \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 As soon as the picture of Laplacian nature was presented to you, the is-ought gap became fatal. As soon as someone told you a story, or you had a sort of miserific vision of nature as bald, mechanical, cold, meaningless, dry, disenchanted, interminable, fatal, dull, dreary, and dead \'97 you became a normative non-naturalist or an anti-realist naturalist. \
\
The thing to realize is that this conception of nature, the Laplacian one, is neither scientific nor natural. For  \'93nature\'94 is a word like \'93thing\'94 that can mean anything. And before we look at \'93everything\'94 all at once and determine what \'93everything\'94 is like in our world-picture, we should look at specific things. Before we decide what can possibly count as \'93natural\'94 and \'93non-natural,\'94 we should look at some nature. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 The first thing to look at is any living organism \'97 say, fungus. Fungus is not a part of Laplacian nature. Bacteria are impossible in Laplaces nature. Reductionism of biological organisms to physical or mechanical systems has simply failed. In the heady days of the scientific revolution, perhaps, there was some sense in holding out hope that reductionism would come through in the end. But it has been 300 years, and we are not an inch further down the road of successful reduction. Indeed, we are miles further back. We now know what Newton, Hume, Laplace did not know \'97 that the biomass of microbial life outweighs mammalian life by an order of hundreds (Whitman 1998). And that the mitochondria of a single celled organism are more complicated than cars. Laplace simply lacked the imagination (or the prophetic power) to belief that all the variegated functions and forms of life on earth (and perhaps elsewhere) are something new, something unprecedented, something like a singularity in the cosmos. \
\
The second thing to look at is apes and dolphins. These fascinating creatures are nowhere to be found in the \'93impoverished arsenals of the [Laplacian] imagination\'94 (to borrow a fine-tipped phrase from Sir Richard Dawkins). \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 There is no \'93enchantment\'94 to this enchanting picture. It is the scientific picture, if biology, organic chemistry, primatology, ethology, sociology, or any of the other dozens of life sciences and social sciences are genuine sciences. To quote Dawkins again, a poet of science if there ever was one \'97 \'93The scientific world view is \'85 exciting\'85 poetic\'85 filled with sheer wonder\'85\'94 He may be a physicalist but but the belief that \'93physical\'94 just means \'93Laplacian\'94 is a superstition. If the \'93physical\'94 is the \'93Laplacian\'94 then the \'93physical\'94 excludes fungus, the ostrich, and us.\
\
Thomas Nagel\'92s delightfully simple, deceptively profound, and terrifyingly significant *Mind and Cosmos* is just one of a new windfall of modern philosophers who are scientific, naturalistic, and unapologetically non-Laplacian. Nagel includes not just life (as I have) but consciousness, rationality, and morality as the egg on Laplace\'92s face. He cannot, and never will be able to, account for them. \
\
So we live in a time after the is-ought gap. It did not exist in the ancient and medieval world. It was born, somewhere after the scientific revolution, in the minds of those with a genuine admiration for modern science who mistook the \'93scientific\'94 picture for the Laplacian one. However, it began to age \'97 and not gracefully either \'97 Somewhere around the discovery of the gene, or DNA, the dominant view of nature ceased to be the Laplacian one. Working scientists do not bother reducing things that are, to them, obviously fundamental properties of living organisms. These are not ghosts in every house or gods in every church; these are microbiomes that live on your body and outnumber your very cells. These are organs that pump blood to your brain so you can read these words.  The is-ought gap grew old and sickly in the heady days of reductionism, eliminative and monistic physicalism, and logical positivism. It is now barely alive on life support and gasping its last. I would dare to venture that this essay will help us all to collectively pull the plug. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Since the rise of modern science, life, consciousness, rationality, and morality have not gone away. Life, consciousness, and the others are never going away. But life, consciousness, and the others are incompatible with the Laplacian picture. And without the Laplacian picture of nature, there is no is-ought gap. And we ought to reject the out-dated, unscientific, anti-naturalistic, dreadfully simplistic Laplacian picture. So we ought to realize there is no is-ought gap. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls13\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}"Everything has to tell a story."\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}\
\pard\tx560\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\fs28 \cf0 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
12. Teleology or Deontology?\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf4 The received view is that Kant's moral philosophy is a deontological normative theory at least to this extent: it denies that right and wrong are in some way or other functions of goodness or badness. It denies, in other words, the central claim of teleological moral views. For instance, act consequentialism is one sort of teleological theory. It asserts that the right action is that action of all the alternatives available to the agent that has the best overall outcome. Here, the goodness of the outcome determines the rightness of an action. Another sort of teleological theory might focus instead on character traits. 'Virtue ethics' asserts that a right action in any given circumstance is that action a virtuous person does or would perform in those circumstances. In this case, it is the goodness of the character of the person who does or would perform it that determines the rightness of an action. In both cases, as it were, the source or ground of rightness is goodness. And Kant's own views have typically been classified as deontological precisely because they have seemed to reverse this priority and deny just what such theories assert. Rightness, on the standard reading of Kant, is not grounded in the value of outcomes or character.\
There are several reasons why readers have thought that Kant denies the teleological thesis. First, he makes a plethora of statements about outcomes and character traits that appear to imply an outright rejection of both forms of teleology. For instance, in 
\i Groundwork
\i0  I, he says that he takes himself to have argued that \'93the objectives we may have in acting, and also our actions' effects considered as ends and what motivates our volition, can give to actions no unconditional or moral worth\'85[this] can be found nowhere but in the principle of the will, irrespective of the ends that can be brought about by such action\'94 (4: 400). This appears to say that moral rightness is not a function of the value of intended or actual outcomes. Kant subsequently says that a categorical imperative \'93declares an action to be objectively necessary of itself without reference to any purpose\'97that is, even without any further end\'94 (4:415). A categorical imperative \'93commands a certain line of conduct directly, without assuming or being conditional on any further goal to be reached by that conduct\'94 (4:416). These certainly appear to be the words of someone who rejects the idea that what makes actions right is primarily their relationship to what good may come of those actions, someone who rejects outright the act consequentialist form of teleology. Moreover, Kant begins the 
\i Groundwork
\i0  by noting that character traits such as the traditional virtues of courage, resolution, moderation, self-control, or a sympathetic cast of mind possess no unconditional, moral worth, (4:393-94, 398-99). If the moral rightness of an action is grounded in the value of the character traits of the person who performs or would perform it, then it seems Kant thinks that it would be grounded in something of only conditional value. This certainly would not comport well with the virtue ethics form of teleology.\
Second, there are, deeper theoretical claims and arguments of Kant's in both the 
\i Groundwork
\i0  and in the second 
\i Critique
\i0  that appear to be incompatible with any sort of teleological form of ethics. These claims and arguments all stem from Kant's insistence that morality is grounded in the autonomy of a rational will. For instance, Kant states that \'93if the will seeks the law that is to determine it anywhere else than in the fitness of its maxims for its own giving of universal law\'85heteronomy always results\'94 (4:441) If the law determining right and wrong is grounded in either the value of outcomes or the value of the character of the agent, it seems it will not be found in the fitness of the action's maxim to be a universal law laid down by the agent's own rational will. And Kant's most complete treatment of value, the second 
\i Critique's
\i0  \'93On the Concept of an Object of Pure Practical Reason\'94, appears to be a relentless attack on any sort of teleological moral theory. \'93The concept of good and evil\'94 he states, \'93must not be determined before the moral law (for which, as it would seem, this concept would have to be made the basis) but only (as was done here) after it and by means of it\'94 (5:63).\
\
A number of Kant's readers have come to question this received view, however. Perhaps the first philosopher to suggest a teleological reading was John Stuart Mill. In the first chapter of his 
\i Utilitarianism
\i0 , Mill implies that the Universal Law formulation of the Categorical Imperative could only sensibly be interpreted as a test of the consequences of universal adoption of a maxim. Several 20th century theorists have followed Mill's suggestion, most notably, R. M. Hare. Hare argued that moral judgments such as \'93Stealing is wrong\'94 are in fact universal prescriptions (\'93No stealing anywhere by anyone!\'94) And because they are universal, Hare argued, they forbid making exceptions. That in turn requires moral judgments to give each person's wellbeing, including our own, equal weight. And when we give each person's wellbeing equal weight, we are acting to produce the best overall outcome. Thus, in his view, the CI is \'93simply utilitarianism put into other words\'94 (Hare, 1993, p. 103). More recently, David Cummiskey (Cummiskey, 1996) has argued that Kant's view that moral principles are justified because they are universalizable is compatible with those principle themselves being consequentialist. Indeed, Cummiskey argues that they must be: respect for the value of Humanity entails treating the interests of each as counting for one and one only, and hence for always acting to produce the best overall outcome.\
\
There are also teleological readings of Kant's ethics that are non-consequentialist. Barbara Herman has urged philosophers to \'93leave deontology behind\'94 as an understanding of Kant's moral theory on the grounds that the conception of practical reason grounding the Categorical Imperative is itself a conception of value. Herman's idea is that Kant never meant to say that no value grounds moral principles. That, she argues, would imply that there would be no reason to conform to them. Instead, Kant thought the principles of rationality taken together constitute rational agency, and rational agency so constituted itself functions as a value that justifies moral action. (1993, 231) Herman's proposal thus has Kant's view grounding the rightness of actions in rational agency, and then in turn offering rational agency itself up as a value. Both Paul Guyer and Allen Wood have offered proposals that differ from Herman's in content, but agree on the general form of teleology that she defends as a reading of Kant. Guyer argues that autonomy itself is the value grounding moral requirements. Moral thinking consists in recognizing the priceless value of a rational agent's autonomous will, something in light of whose value it is necessary for any rational agent to modify his behavior (1998, 22-35). And Wood argues that humanity itself is the grounding value for Kant. While the second 
\i Critique
\i0  claims that good things owe their value to being the objects of the choices of rational agents, they could not, in his view, acquire any value at all if the source of that value, rational agency, itself had no value. (1999, 130; see also pp. 157-8) Finally, Rae Langton has recently argued that if Kant's theory is to be thought of as an objectivistic view, we must suppose that the value of humanity and the good will are independent of simply being the objects of our rational choices. If their value thereby becomes the source of the rightness of our actions \'97 say, our actions are right if and because they treat that self-standing value in various ways \'97 then her reading too is teleological.\
\
It is of considerable interest to those who follow Kant to determine which reading \'97 teleological or deontological \'97 was actually Kant's, as well as which view ought to have been his. A powerful argument for the teleological reading is the motivation for Herman's proposal: What rationale can we provide for doing our duty at all if we don't appeal to it's being good to do it? But a powerful argument for the deontological reading is Kant's own apparent insistence that the authority of moral demands must come simply from their being the demands of each person's own rational will, quite apart from the value that will may have. (see Schneewind, 1996, Johnson, 2007, 2008, also Reath, 1994) On the latter view, moral demands gain their authority simply because you yourself have, insofar as you are rational, willed them. Proponents of this reading are left with the burden of answering Herman's challenge to provide a rationale for having willed it. On the former view, by contrast, a rationale is at hand: because your will is, insofar as it is rational, good. Proponents of this former reading are then left with the burden of explaining how it could be the autonomy of the will alone that explains the authority of morality.\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf4 Ahlstrom, Epistemic Value\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf4 Coup, Critique of Shafer-Landau\
\
\
Ahlstrom, Kristoffer, Moderate Epistemic Expressivism\
\
Russon, John.  \'93Aristotle\'92s Animative Epistemology\'94 in Idealistic Studies. \
\
Brown, Stephen. Really Naturalizing Virtue, Ethic@, v. 4, n.1, p. 7-22, Jun 2005. \
\
Hempel, Carl G. Aspects of Scientific Explanation, The Free Press, 1965. \
\
Jacobs, Nathan. \'93On the Metaphysics of God and Creatures in the Eastern Pro-Nicenes\'94\
\
Gert, Joshua. \'93Problems for Moral Twin Earth Arguments\'94, Synthese, Vol. 150, No. 2 (2006), pp. 171-183. \
\
Joyce, Richard. \'93What neuroscience can (and cannot) contribute to metaethics\'94 in Moral Psychology Volume 3: The Neuroscience of Morality: Emotion, Brain Disorders, and Development W. Sinnott-Armstrong (ed.). MIT, 2008. \
\
MacIntyre, Alasdair. Dependent Rational Animals: Why Human Beings Need the Virtues. Open Court, 1999. \
\
Mend ham, Matthew. \'93Kant and the \'91Distinctively Moral Ought\'92: A Platonic-Augustinian Defense, Against MacIntyre\'94, Journal of Religion, Vol. 87, No. 4 (2007), pp.556-591. \
\
Finlay, Stephen. \'93Four Faces of Moral Realism\'94, Philosophy Compass 2, 2007. \
\
Morgan, Seiriol. "Naturalism and Normativity."Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 72, no. 2 (2006): 319-344.\
\
Wielenberg, Erik J. "On the Evolutionary Debunking of Morality*." Ethics 120, no. 3 (2010): 441-464.\
\
Wielenberg, E. (2010). \
\
Arnhart, Larry. "The new Darwinian naturalism in political theory." American Political Science Review 89, no. 02 (1995): 389-400.\
\
Vogler, Candace. "Modern moral philosophy again: Isolating the promulgation problem." In Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, vol. 106, pp. 345-362. Aristotelian Society, 2006.\
\
Vogler, C. (2006). Modern moral philosophy again: Isolating the promulgation problem. In Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society (Vol. 106, pp. 345-362). Aristotelian Society.\
\
Huneman, Philippe. "Naturalising purpose: From comparative anatomy to the \'91adventure of reason\'92." Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 37, no. 4 (2006): 649-674.\
\
Poole, Randall Allen. "The neo-idealist reception of kant in the Moscow Psychological Society." Journal of the History of Ideas 60, no. 2 (1999): 319-343.\
\
Railton, Peter. "Aesthetic value, moral value, and the ambitions of naturalism."Aesthetics and ethics: Essays at the intersection (1998): 59-105.\
\
Scanlon, Thomas M. Being realistic about reasons. Oxford University Press, 2014.\
\
Simpson, Peter, and Sine Quibus Non. "Goodness and nature." Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff (1987).\
\
Jenkins, John. Is \
Hacker\uc0\u8208 Wright, John. "What is natural about foot's ethical naturalism?." Ratio22, no. 3 (2009): 308-321.\
\
Thompson, Michael. What is it to Wrong Someone?: A Puzzle about Justice. Faculty of Law, University of Toronto, 2003.\
\
\
\
Horgan, Terence. "From supervenience to superdupervenience: Meeting the demands of a material world." Mind (1993): 555-586.\
\
\
\
FIND AND READ\
\
Odenbaugh, Jay. "Nothing in ethics makes sense except in the light of evolution? Natural goodness, normativity, and naturalism." Synthese (2015): 1-25.\
\
\
\
Barham, James Alan. "Teleological Realism in Biology." PhD diss., University of Notre Dame, 2011.\
\
Lott, Micah. "Why be a good Human Being? Natural Goodness, Reason, and the Authority of Human Nature." Philosophia 42, no. 3 (2014): 761-777.\
\
The central claim of Aristotelian naturalism is that moral goodness is a kind of species-specific natural goodness. Aristotelian naturalism has recently enjoyed a resurgence in the work of philosophers such as Philippa Foot, Rosalind Hursthouse, and Michael Thompson. However, any view that takes moral goodness to be a type of natural goodness faces a challenge: Granting that moral goodness is natural goodness for human beings, why should we care about being good human beings? Given that we are rational creatures who can \'91step back\'92 from our nature, why should we see human nature as authoritative for us? This is the authority-of-nature challenge. In this essay, I state this challenge clearly, identify its deep motivation, and distinguish it from other criticisms of Aristotelian naturalism. I also articulate what I consider the best response, which I term the practical reason response. This response, however, exposes Aristotelian naturalism to a new criticism \'96 that it has abandoned the naturalist claim that moral goodness is species-specific natural goodness. Thus, I argue, Aristotelian naturalists appear to face a dilemma: Either they cannot answer the authority-of-nature challenge, or in meeting the challenge they must abandon naturalism. Aristotelian naturalists might overcome this dilemma, but doing so is harder than some Aristotelians have supposed. In the final sections of the paper, I examine the difficulties in overcoming the dilemma, and I suggest ways that Aristotelians might answer the authority-of-nature challenge while preserving naturalism.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
For more recent treatments of Aristotle's teleology, see Nussbaum (1978); Sorabji (1980); Baime (1980); and, most of all, Gotthelf (1976).\
\
 \
\
Barham 2011 \'97 Teleological Realism in Biology\
\
More specifically, I will be exploring the idea that teleological discourse, both in everyday life and in biological science, is best understood as describing real, objectively existing properties of biological systems, quite apart from human interests and conceptual schemes. This means the claim that\'97assuming a broadly realistic stance towards the objects of everyday and biological discourse\'97teleological phenomena should be viewed as being on an ontological par with such well-known biological phenomena as 1 On this distinction, see Lennox (1992). 2 locomotion, phagocytosis, photosynthesis, and the like. I will refer to this basic claim as \'93teleological realism in biology\'94 (TRB, for short).\
\
 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf4 Neo-Aristotelian Ethical Naturalism\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf4 \

\i Rosalind Hursthouse\

\i0 The proponents of neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism (henceforth \'93Aristotelian naturalism\'94 for short) include\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf4 Geach (1956, 1977), \
Anscombe because her work has influenced so many others. (Gaut [1997, 2002] should also be known as a significant contributor.) \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf4 \
Foot (2001), \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf4 Hursthouse (1999), \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf4 McDowell (1995), \
MacIntyre (1999), \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf4 Nussbaum (1993, 1995), and \
Thompson (1995); and also \
\
Brown, Adams,  \
\
Their views are so unlike those of other proponents of ethical naturalism (see Naturalism, Ethical), and they occupy such an unfamiliar position in philosophy, that they are simultaneously criticized on at least two quite different bases. Some say they are not trying to offer naturalism at all, because they avowedly employ a moralized conception of human nature; some say they are trying to offer naturalism insofar as they offer a biological foundation for ethics, but that either this has counterintuitive upshots or the biology is Aristotle's and thereby pre-Darwinian and not a proper naturalistic foundation at all.\
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf4 Neo-Aristotelian Naturalism and the Indeterminacy Objection\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf4 \
Philippa Foot\'92s virtue ethics remains an intriguing but divisive position in normative ethics. For some, the promise of grounding human virtue in natural facts is a useful method of establishing normative content. For others, the natural facts on which the virtues are established appear naively uninformed when it comes to the empirical details of our species. In response to this criticism, a new cohort of neo-Aristotelians like John Hacker-Wright attempt to defend Foot by reminding critics that the facts at stake are not claimed to be explanatory descriptions of the kind provided by empirical science. Instead, they are derived from a logical form that is presupposed when we categorize something as a living organism. Neo-Aristotelian naturalism is therefore said to be immune to the empirical defeaters put forward as criticism of the theory. I argue that neo-Aristotelians like Hacker-Wright can only rescue Foot\'92s naturalism from being uninformed by exposing it to an indeterminacy objection: if claims about human virtue are grounded in facts about our species other than those derived from science, then the position becomes immune to empirical defeaters at the cost of being unable to generate informative normative content.\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://philpapers.org/go.pl?id=GOWVAN&proxyId=&u=http%3A%2F%2Forigin.web.fordham.edu%2Fimages%2Fundergraduate%2Fpsychology%2Ffisher%2Fvirtue%2520and%2520nature.pdf"}}{\fldrslt \cf5 Virtue and nature}}\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl260
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://philpapers.org/s/Christopher%20W.%20Gowans"}}{\fldrslt 
\b \cf6 Christopher W. Gowans}}
\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://philpapers.org/asearch.pl?pub=1019"}}{\fldrslt 
\i\b0 \cf6 Social Philosophy and Policy}}
\b0  25 (1):28-55 (2008)\

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trmaxw24000 \tamart200 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1040\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr400 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth9360\clftsWidth3 \clmaxw20000 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb200 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl420
\cf7 Abstract\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl420
\cf0 The Neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism of Philippa Foot and Rosalind Hursthouse purports to establish a naturalistic criterion for the virtues. Specifically, by developing a parallel between the natural ends of nonhuman animals and the natural ends of human beings, they argue that character traits are justified as virtues by the extent to which they promote and do not inhibit natural ends such as self-preservation, reproduction, and the well-being of one\'92s social group. I argue that the approach of Foot and Hursthouse cannot provide a basis for moral universalism, the widely-accepted idea that each human being has moral worth and thus deserves significant moral consideration. Foot and Hursthouse both depict a virtuous agent as implicitly acting in accord with moral universalism. However, with respect to charity, a virtue they both emphasize, their naturalistic criterion (especially in the more elaborate form developed by Hursthouse) at best provides a warrant for a restricted form of charity that extends only to a limited number of persons. There is nothing in the natural ends of human beings, as Foot and Hursthouse understand these, that gives us a reason for having any concern for the well-being of human beings as such\
\
\
Beg and Davis, Alignment of Ethical Naturalism and Neo-Kantian Non-Naturalism\
\
\cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720

\b\fs32 \cf6 Neo-Aristotelian Attempts to Bind Morality to Human Nature\
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://philpapers.org/s/Daniel%20Hirst"}}{\fldrslt Daniel Hirst}}\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://philpapers.org/asearch.pl?pub=3850"}}{\fldrslt 
\i\b0 \cf6 Emergent Australasian Philosophers}}
\b0  1 (1) (2008)\

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trcbpat1 \trmaxw24000 \tamart200 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1040\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr400 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth14060\clftsWidth3 \clmaxw20000 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb200 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl420

\fs28 \cf7 Abstract\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl420
\cf0 The purpose of this paper is to examine recent neo-Aristotelian attempts to tie morality to human nature. I look specifically at the work in this field conducted by Philippa Foot and Rosalind Hursthouse. In particular, I articulate their distinct use of the word \'91good\'92 , and how in making this move they illuminate what we are doing when we make ethical evaluations. I then look at two pieces written by Julia Annas and Bernard Williams which attempt to criticise the neo-Aristotelian project. I ultimately defend the neo-Aristotelian argument that moral activity is on par with self-interested behaviour in any evaluation of practical rationality\
\
\cell \lastrow\row
\pard\tx560\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\fs24 \cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
}