{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## Animals of peculiar sort\
\
All humans are animals. This is not a trivial point. To be an animal entails the presence of several other properties, some of which will be seen below to have potential ethical significance. However, humans are animals of a peculiar sort in that we exhibit a unique range of thoughts and activities. Attempts to characterize human nature, then, must not only cite our *physicality* -- our relation to the physical world -- but our *animality* -- our relation to the living world as a whole.  I will first discuss the properties entailed in the concept of 'animal' (which we share with other organisms) and then discuss the properties entailed in the concept of 'practical, rational' (which differentiate us from other organisms.) \
\
To be an animal entails many things. For example, it entails a particular set of relations with respect to other animals and ecosystems. To be an animal is to belong to the "tree of life" \'97 and to have a location in the broader story of life on earth.  As Michael Mautner explains, all living things (on earth at least) share common ancestors and even share genetic material. He says:\
\
>...phylogenetic trees indicate that all terrestrial life can be traced to a common ancestor. Organisms as different from us as yeasts share half; mice, over 90%, chimpanzees, over 95%, and different human individuals share over 99% of our genome. These scientific insights give a deeper meaning to the unity of all Life. Our complex molecular patterns are common to all organic gene/protein life and distinguish us from any other phenomena of nature.[@mautner2009life 434-5]\
\
Suppose that the earth was formed about 4.5 billion years ago; that life arose on earth 3.5 billion years ago; and that anatomically modern humans arose on the earth about 200,000 years ago or in the "Late Pleistocene of 120,000 years ago."[@brown2008virtue 102] The first among our species lived in Africa. They emigrated from that landmass and settled in various parts of the globe. In contemporary classificatory scheme, we can locate humans within the phylum chordata, the class mammalia, the order of primates, the suborder haplorhini, the familiy hominidae, the genus homo, the species homo sapiens. \
\
Secondly, unlike prokaryotic organisms (such as bacteria), all mammals come to be through process of fusing dimorphic gametes, such as ova and sperm cells, into a fertilized zygote. New fertilized zygotes, once generated, grow through a process of cell division found only in eukaryotic organisms, such as fungi, plants, mammals. Meiosis is a process of division leading to the creation of new cells that each contain the same genetic material as the original. In other words, the cell divides and transmits the genetic material in the zygote to the daughter cells. However, in all such organisms it is possible that errors occur in meiosis, which results in genetic defects. The ethical implications of genetic defect in humans is profound, since such defects may underly everything from developmental disabilities to common mental illnesses.\
\
Thirdly, being an animal entails that an organism begins life as a tiny zygote and progresses through gestation to infancy, maturation, and adulthood, at which point it may reproduce itself before dying. All of these phases we notice in human animals as well. The human life cycle is characterized by various phases, including growth, language acquisition, puberty, physical maturity and characteristic activities, aging, and death. Unlike other mammals, female humans go through menopause. Humans tend to thrive best in climates averaging between 42-80 degrees Fahrenheit[@guo2014global], but some cultures live and thrive in extreme temperatures.\
\
 To zoom our perspective out a bit further, we can observe that human beings (like other species) not only have a natural history, and a characteristic natural life cycle, but also a natural destiny \'97 such as extinction, or evolution into a new species, or indefinite preservation through sexual reproduction, or something else.\
\
Now, apparently innocent descriptions of human animals are inseparable from ethological and anthropological descriptions, which can blend into the normative. The property of being an animal encompasses a whole range of biological and neurophysiological facts that obtain in each normal human being. For example, humans' heights range from 4'7" to 6'3" (plus or minus) and weights range from 120-180 pounds (plus or minus). When someone suffers from a growth disorders such as dwarfism (under 4'10'' in human adults) or gigantism, we identify the disorder by reference to such generics.\
\
  Humans have 23 chromosomes in each somatic cell, with about 22,000 total genes. Humans have 32 teeth and an extremely diverse diet of carbohydrates, fats, fiber, minerals, proteins, vitamins, and water: they eat vegetables, red meat, fish, nuts, seeds, berries, fruits, mushroom, mollusks, herbs, and more. Genetically modern humans don't just hunt and gather but farm, store, combine, ferment, and cook food. They have opposable thumbs, are bipedal, and walk upright. \
\
At this point in the description of the human species, the difficulty (I should say impossibility) of separating the biological, behavioral, and social conditions of being a human being becomes plain. Presumably, even an alien anthropologist who knew nothing of human language or "what it is like to be a human" would be able to notice, upon examination, that a human's laugh or cry is different from a hyena's laugh or a crocodile's tears. Part of the alien anthropologist's examination would be to examine the body, brain, and hands of human beings. For example, humans have large brains relative to other primates, with a neocortex and prefrontal cortex that correlate with abstract thinking, problem solving, society, and culture. And indeed, humans live in cultures and societies. They are language-users, communicating in signs and symbols. Their language is an extremely complex, open-ended system which is both recursive (able to nest propositions within propositions) and productive (able to create sentences by potentially limitless combinations of words). In virtue of language and their opposable thumbs, they are creative; they don't just live on the ground or under ground, but build houses and shelters, sometimes in new places, such as caves, trees, hills, mountains, etc. Also, they are self-reflective. They establish social relations upon biological grounds (some children growing up with natural parents) and upon normative grounds (some orphans growing up in orphanages created by philanthropists).}