{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Verdana;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\i\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Synthetic Ethical Naturalism\
\
\

\b Author\'92s Abstract
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360

\f1\i0\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
This dissertation is a critique of synthetic ethical naturalism (SEN). SEN is a view in metaethics that comprises three key theses: \
first, there are moral properties and facts that are independent of the beliefs and attitudes of moral appraisers (moral realism); \
\
second, moral properties and facts are identical to (or constituted only by) natural properties and facts (ethical naturalism); \
\
and third, sentences used to assert identity or constitution relations between moral and natural properties are expressions of synthetic, a posteriori necessities. \
\
The last of these theses, which distinguishes SEN from other forms of ethical naturalism, is supported by a fourth: the semantic contents of the central moral predicates such as 'morally right' and 'morally good' are fixed in part by features external to the minds of speakers (moral semantic externalism). \
\
Chapter 1 introduces SEN and discusses the most common motivations for accepting it. The next three chapters discuss the influential "Moral Twin Earth" argument against moral semantic externalism. \
\
In Chapter 2, I defend this argument from the charge that the thought experiment upon which it depends is defective. \
\
In Chapters 3 and 4, I consider two attempts to amend SEN so as to render it immune to the Moral Twin Earth argument. I show that each of these proposed amendments amounts to an abandonment of SEN. \
\
Chapter 5 explores Richard Boyd's proposal that moral goodness is a "homeostatic property cluster." If true, Boyd's hypothesis could be used to support several metaphysical, epistemological, and semantic claims made on behalf of SEN. I advance three arguments against this account of moral goodness. \
\
Chapter 6In the sixth chapter, I argue that moral facts are not needed in the best a posteriori explanations of our moral beliefs and moral sensibility. Because of this, those who accept a metaphysical naturalism ought to deny the existence of such facts or else accept skepticism about moral knowledge. \
\
In Chapter 7, I consider a counterargument on behalf of SEN to the effect that moral facts are needed in order to explain the predictive success of our best moral theories. I show that this argument fails.\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl384
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
}