{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red28\green28\blue28;\red10\green0\blue109;\red82\green35\blue83;
}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Stephen Brown\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
Brown's project is to advance the cause of neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism.  His opening lines are these: \
\
>Human beings are a species of social animal for which there is a characteristic way of life. An individual human being may be evaluated as good or bad according to how well that individual realizes the human way of life. I argue that there is teleology in nature; that the fact/value gap \'97 however we reasonably construe that idea \'97 not an overriding concern; and that neo-Darwinism is no threat to the theory. (Brown 2008, 1)\
\
In this chapter, I provide a detailed summary and analysis of Brown\'92s primary theses. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Naturalism?
\b0 \
Brown's aim is to defend a species of ethical naturalism that is cognitivist and in which "important ethical norms and evaluations are grounded in natural facts." (2008, 2). He does not reject outright but rather brackets the supernatural. And he defines 'nature' as "what[ever] our latest and best science tells us it is" including psychology and sociology along with physics and biology. 
\b \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
Brown\'92s naturalism plays a stronger role than he makes it seem to here. In fact, the assumption that {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://3DCFD585-5A0E-4559-8AD9-E5EC8842AF03"}}{\fldrslt \'93human beings are continuous with nature\'94}} is essential to his project. But this is a highly tendentious assumption. It is an assumption that naturalists regularly make. But it is justified? \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://AD4C3EAE-87F4-4E5A-B66C-2AF462E73B3B"}}{\fldrslt \cf0 %% Stopped here in writing intro sequences
\b \
}}\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Explanandum
\b0 \
What is the explanandum for ethical naturalism? There are several. Each may need to look to its own science for an answer. \
\
* How an individual comes to have the norms he or she does: psychology, personal history. \
* How a group comes to have the norms they do: sociology, anthropology, etc. \
* For Brown, it is important to distinguish virtue ethics from \'93decision theory\'94. Virtue ethics may not tell us what to do.\
He admits, and seems melancholically resigned to the fact, that what we "end up with [might be] a mere description and not, alas, a justification..." (Brown 3).\
\

\b Teleology 
\b0 \
The metaphysical framework in which Brown wants to build ethical naturalism is this: nature is teleological. ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://901708CF-AB4C-44B4-9180-ADCF5A6A5715"}}{\fldrslt Compare Nagel's natural teleology}}.) He doesn't want to reduce ethics to biology or physics, but to explain ethics in "terms of the 
\i rest
\i0  of nature" (Brown 5, quoting Bernard Williams).\
But what is the "rest of nature?" Especially if human beings are radically continuous with nature, as he avers, why do we even keep such locutions as "the rest"? He means that "the rest" of nature includes non-human stuff (rocks, stars, trees) and non-ethical human stuff (psychology, biology, culture, etc.). But wait. Does ethical naturalism have to ground normative facts in non-normative facts? No. He, along with Nagel, finds this dogmatic starting point unjustified. Rather, some normative facts are brute (for their domain at least) and ground other normative facts. These natural normative facts are natural teleological facts. "Teleology allows us to infer normative conclusions" (Brown 5). \
\

\b Values as Real and Scientifically Knowable
\b0 \
He also wants to account for our criterion that ethics seems objective. He also wants to account for the sense that ethics can be or should be a science or something like a science or continuous with another recognizable science or (at the very least) not inconsistent with other recognizable sciences. \
\

\b Social Utility\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 As a social group, we have a common good. For Aristotle -- and Brown seems to agree -- your good, my good, and our social good are intimately interrelated. \
\
Social and political pluralism has pros and cons. Brown hopes a naturalistic ethical theory may be of some use in negotiating the "methods of dealing with conflicts among divergent belief systems" (2008, 10). Rather than rooting putative ethical truths in contentious religious claims, we may hope to root ethical truths in a universally accessible nature. We may hope to have "freedom *of* religion as well as freedom *from* religion", enjoying whatever truths might originate from a religious tradition without relying on that religion (10). We may hope that the one thing that unites us, our common human nature, may be a source of commanility in guidance on how to live. \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 #### Telos and Function - General considerations\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 The way we discover our common nature is by examine our *ergon* (our proper work). Brown says that this ergon is almost *function*, but not quite. He summarizes Aristotle's famous argument that *eudaimonia* is our good but seems to favor the second argument. \
\
>If we know a thing's function, then we can easily figure out what it is for the thing to function well. A thing's functinong well is its best good. Thus, if we know what the function of a human being *qua* human being is, then we can figure out what it is for a human being to function well, and this well functioning of a human being is the best good for that sort of being. (Brown 23)\
\
The function of a thing, in Aristotle, is the work it performs that is not also the function of other things. Each thing like 'hammer' has a differentia from all non-hammers -- namely, pounding or hammering. And each type of hammer has a differentia from other hammers: framing, finishing hammer, mallot, sledge, etc., all pound but pound different objects or do so differently. But human beings live and grow and metabolize like plants; we sense perceive like horses, oxen, and other animals; our ergon 'expresses' or 'requires'  *reason* (or as Foot would have it, speech). Our function is to reason; our good is reasoning well. \
\
How reasoning well relates wth virtue is a bit trickier. Are virtues simply (by definition) the reasonable activities? If so, then the connection between reason and virtue remains tight. But if not, they need to be connected. \
\
I was illuminated by Brown's discussion of three related concepts:\
\
* the human good\
* the good human being\
* good for a human being\
\
Here is one way of putting it: If virtue is the human good, then a good human is virtuous, and virtues are (as we say of spinach and broccoli) "good for us." By "virtue is the human good" we seem to mean our good qua species. By "good for us" we mean something more specific to individual members of the species. Something related to the human good is good for us in that it feels good, actualizes our potential, fulfills us, perfects us, or something like that. \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 #### The function of artifacts and natural kinds\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 What is the function of a horse? Brown's discussion effectively explores all the options here. Unlike a knife or other artificial object, the function of a horse would not be defined by human artifice. Nor is a horse's function or ergon obviously some work relating to human use (riding, pulling, etc.). It is implausible to suppose that a species is indexed to another species, that a the species is incomplete without being used by humans; furthermore, the individual jobs horses do might be more effectively done by other species (oxen, etc.). But horses have been in some part bred by humans for human purposes (riding, showing, fighting, hunting). So it might be that the *current* breeds of domesticated horses *are in fact* more like knives than wild dogs. Even so, what about other non-domesticated horses? Either they have no ergon at all, or their ergon is something unrelated to human artifice. \
\
Take the first option: horses have no ergon, no function, no discernable final cause, no unique activity they do that nothing else in nature does. Does this option mean we are giving up on "natural teleology" for biology? Plato and Aristotle both speak as if all of nature was teleological. So it would mean giving up on the platonic or Aristotelian version of teleology, for whatever that is worth. But Plato's teleology in the *Timaeus* is admittedly mythical and speculative, while Aristotle explores non-teleological explanations of natural phenomena in his *Physics*, the he says that "Nature does nothing absurdly or to no purpose" (*De Caelo* 291b14). So we haven't quite given up on Aristotle yet. Rather, we need to hear how, if at all, he articulates the natural teleology of individual biological species. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 #### An argument by analogy?\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Brown highlights that Aristotle's argument by analogy amounts to a rhetorical question with which he is trying to "badger" us.  Aristotle's human craftsmen have jobs or functions -- the carpenter works with wood, the horse trainer trains horses, and so on -- so are we to say that humans have no function?\
\
* Humans A, B, C, etc. (qua roles we play, mothers, fathers, craftsmen, etc) all have functions. (via observation)\
* Therefore humanity (qua species) have functions. (via inductive generalization)\
\
* Humans (qua members of the species) are like craftsmen.\
* All craftsmen have functions. (via observation)\
* Therefore humans (qua species) have functions. (via analogy to first premise)\
\
But in what way are humans "like" craftsmen? Aristotle's argument crucially depends on whether one accepts the fundamental comparison between humans qua biological creatures and the roles humans play. \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 #### Contemporary methods\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Brown's suggestion is to apply more familiar methods for finding function. Suppose we find a mysterious artefact in an archeological dig. How would we discover its function? We would compare it to similar known objects of the same time and place, if possible. If there are no similar objects, then we might use the object for various purposes to ascertain what it does (not just what it does *uniquely well*). Of course, multiple objects do the same thing: Brown mentions that phones and email both communicate across long distances. \
\
A response: His example doesn't tell. The "primitive human stumbling across various items" does not have time to familiarize herself with the telephone and email. He does not mention that, given time and/or instruction, the primitive human would discover what we industrialized moderns already know: that email is most often best for asynchronic communication, and phone most often best for synchronic communication. \
\
Regardless, Brown suggests that the biologist looking at organs "faces similar problems"  (Brown 2008, 30). She can compare the functions of similar organisms; if no similar organs are forthcoming, she can see what it *does*. And she can "look at the organ from an evolutionary standpoint" -- that is, "see what effects the existence of the organ has on the survival and reproduction of the organism" (Brown 2008, 30). This last does not invalidate the Platonic/Aristotelian method of looking for what the organism does best, but supplements it. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 #### The human function\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 So what about human beings qua species? Forget my individual telos for a moment. When we examine the function of any old item of human life, say, a knife, we see that it cuts. \
>What is the purpose of cutting vegetables? To prepare them for cooking. Why prepare vegetables for cooking? So we can eat them. What is the purpose of eating? so we can go on living. The series could stop there, but one could continue on and ask what the purpose in living is. In that we confront an existential question. (Brown 31-32)\
Before strongly arguing for or against any of the options, Brown mentions and considers several. \
He briefly considers just ending the series by repeating the last answer: we eat in order to keep living, and we live in order to keep living -- the end. He also considers that the question loses its species-indexed meaning at this point and becomes member-indexed -- what is *my* purpose.  He also considers whether that question has any meaning \'97 perhaps it is an idle and ill-framed question \'97 but ultimately endeavors to answer it. Finally, he considers what would be the significance of answering in the negative. If I qua member of my species have no intrinsic purpose does that mean that any of my self-selected purposes \'97 from social work to suicide \'97 are equally good? \
Brown ultimately concludes that we have no purpose qua human being. We have roles which are inseparable from purposes, even if there is no \'93humanity\'94 at the base of these roles by which to judge a deeper or ultimate purpose. \
A response: I don\'92t think feeble speculations to the contrary will very satisfyingly hinder a suicidal person, in the grips of existential despair, from contemplating the wildest and most irrational deeds of harming self and other. That is not to say that my philosophy would. For the bar is set high for philosophies that would explain (a) why most people prefer to live and indeed love life, and (b) why, in spite of 
\i arguments 
\i0 to the contrary, (a) is still true. \
Carrying on with the notion that our roles define us, Brown considers a theological version of the story. The function of life is \'93to love God, to do His will, to serve Him.\'94 (Brown 2008, 33). One\'92s job is not only one\'92s career but one\'92s calling to live for God in every respect: professionally and personally and so on. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl448\sa140

\b\fs26 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Eudaemonism\

\b0 Brown is not eudaemonistic. His relationship to eudaemonism is interesting and complex. He affirms the proposition that human have a natural end. He denies that the natural end is happiness. Rather, the natural end is reproduction (and only indirectly, survival). Individual and group survival, characteristic freedom from pain, the well-functioning of the social group \'97 the ends he provisionally accepts from Hursthouse\'92s account \'97 these contribute to the passing on of genes. They are good because they so contribute. They get what value they have from the ultimate value, reproductive success. But is this value even good? 
\fs28 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Facts and Values
\b0 \
Brown\'92s discussion of the infamous fact/value split is excellent. He distinguishes between five alleged gaps, and dispenses with the concern that makes such a gap seem so devastating. They are the ontological gap, the logical gap, the semantic gap, the epistemological gap, and the motivational gap. \
The one Brown thinks is truly a worthy opponent is the \'93motivational gap\'94. He says \'93this might be 
\i the 
\i0 problem of ethics\'94 (95, original emphasis). If there is a real motivational gap this might be evidence for the ontological gap (95). \'93The proponent of the motivational gap holds that values can motivate someone to act or give them reasons to act, whereas non-values cannot\'94 (%Brown 95). But if values reduce to non-values then it seems that we act for every reason 
\i but 
\i0 a reason: animal instincts, desires, fears, or neurophysiological flukes. \
The externalist about motivation thinks that the gap can be bridged by desires (95). So perhaps all moral reasons for acting are desires. But desires are hypothetical  \'97 if you want to eat a burger, eat at Joe\'92s \'97 and aren\'92t moral reasons categorical reasons? If moral reasons all have an antecedent like \'93if you are a human being, then do x\'94 then the hypothetical imperative amounts to a categorical one. The antecedent holds true for all of us. \
\
A response: This is a bit cheeky. \
\

\b Moral Virtue and Nature (Evolution Objection) \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 In chapter five, Brown asks this question: is naturalized virtue ethics an \'91evolutionary ethic\'92? That is, does virtue ethics merely describe and explain the way we happen to live ethical lives, judge ourselves and each other, and strive for a variety of ends? \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl448
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_James"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
William James}}\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 wrote about natural selection: "The entire modern deification of survival per se, survival returning into itself, survival naked and abstract, with the denial of any substantive excellence in what survives, except for more survival still, is surely the strangest intellectual stopping-place ever proposed by one man to another".{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolutionary_ethics#cite_note-3"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs22 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\super [3]}}
\fs22 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\super \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl448\sa140

\fs28 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub Michael Ruse (% 1986): \'93Our moral sense, our altruistic nature, is an adaptation\'97a feature helping us in the struggle for existence and reproduction\'97no less than hands and eyes, teeth and feet. It is a cost-effective way of getting us to cooperate, which avoids both the pitfalls of blind action and the expense of a superbrain of pure rationality.
\fs22 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\super  
\f1\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs26 \'93Evolutionary Ethics: A phoenix arisen.\'94 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Zygon Journal of Religion and Science,
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 21, p. 99. Available online at{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.philoscience.unibe.ch/documents/educational_materials/Ruse1986/Ruse1986.pdf"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
http://www.philoscience.unibe.ch/documents/educational_materials/Ruse1986/Ruse1986.pdf}}
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl448\sa140

\b\fs26 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Our place in nature\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl448\sa140

\b0\fs28 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93In a sense \'85 the evolutionist's case is that ethics is a collective illusion of the human race, fashioned and maintained by natural selection in order to promote individual reproduction. \'85 ethics is illusory inasmuch as it persuades us that it has an objective reference. This is the crux of the biological position.
\fs22 \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\super \'94 
\f1\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs26 % Ruse, p. 235.
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
Brown says, \'93Naturalized virtue ethics assumes continuity between human beings and the rest of nature.\'94 So, human beings are \'93an evolved species\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs26 Brown 101.% 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
  Some think that this implies that there is no human nature, or that humans are \'93sub-optimal\'94 or that ethics has no normative authority. He refutes the first two worries but concedes the third. \
\
\
Brown\'92s description of our place in nature is quite lovely, even if (as I think) it is false. \'93Human beings are a kind of animal that live in various terrestrial environments on a small planet in the corner of a medium-sized galaxy in the midst of a very large universe. \'91Man\'92 does not just have a place in nature: we are nature. Not only are we creatures susceptible to the vicissitudes of the environments in which we make our way, but we are also ourselves environments, and parts of environments for other creatures. The continuity of human beings and nature is a fundamental assumption of naturalism. The distinction between the \'91artificial\'92 creations of humans and the \'91natural\'92 creations of other plants and animals has its roots in a collective illusion under which almost all of us dwell, except perhaps when at our most reflective. This collective illusion is that humans are different from nature: and not just different in degree from the \'91lesser\'92 animals, but different in some way that, for lack of a better term, we might call metaphysical. That said, there is perhaps a basis of truth in many illusions. Human beings have some phenotypic traits that, we suspect, are not shared by the other animals. One of our special traits allows us to reflect and to theorize.\
	\'93In the usual Linnaean taxonomic scheme, human beings are of the kingdom animalia, the phylum chordata, the class mammal, the order primate, the family hominid, the genus 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
homo, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
and the species 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
sapiens. 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
To differentiate modern humans from our more immediate ancestors, our subspecies is indicated by adding another \'91aspens\'92 to the binomial nomenclature, making us 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Homo sapiens sapiens. 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Apparently, H. s. Sapiens has been here for some time, at least by human historical standards. The oldest discovered evidence dates to approximately the Late Pleistocene of 120,000 years ago. Presumably, we got here \'97 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
here 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
in the sense of \'91this place and time\'92 as well as 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
here 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
in the sense of \'91the way we are\'92 \'97 in more or less the very way in which all the other kinds of organisms did. We 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
evolved\'94 (
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
% Brown 104). \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl448\sa140

\b \cf2 Darwinism Two Objections\
There is no teleology\

\b0 Brown presents two Darwinian obstacles to naturalized virtue ethics. The first is that flourishing is not possible for haphazardly constructed animals whose only design plan is that chance and natural selection preserve all non-lethal genetic mutations. In a word, human beings are \'93a mess\'94 % Brown 104. The second is that Darwinism might undermine natural teleology. Teleology, we recall, is the basis of natural normativity at least in living things. \
But Brown rejects \'93global teleology.\'94 The only teleology is such as evolutionary theory 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
underwrites 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
rather than 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
undermines. 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
That is, his view \'93does not commit one to believing in an \'91orchestral score\'92 according to which we should each play our \'91special part\'92.\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs26 % Brown 110.
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 Rather, human life is more like a \'93jazz improvisation.\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs26 Brown 111 %. 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 Evolution has to explain the unity and diversity of human nature. The unity is that human nature is a \'93set of adaptations shared by all races and ethnic groups.\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs26 Brown 110. %
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 Yet for each individual there are \'93many paths a human being could take in this life\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs26 Brown 110. %
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
  Human nature provides  a \'93deep structure\'94 defined by those adaptations of our species. Brown makes the analogy to Chomsky\'92s insight about grammar being innate, while first languages vary widely according to culture. But, he says, \'93from the gene\'92s point of view, as it were, culture is just mor environment and thus provides different adaptive problems to solve.\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs26 Brown 111. %
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 In terms of teleology, it exists within the song according to the intentions of the musicians. \
\
A responses: \
1. Just how evolutionary explanations underwrite (non-global) teleology is not clear to me. \
2. Erik Wielenberg argues that evolutionary debunking arguments fail. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl448\sa140
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "x-scrivener-item:///Users/KEDB/Google%20Drive/Dissertation/dissertation.scriv?id=385"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
x-scrivener-item:///Users/KEDB/Google%20Drive/Dissertation/dissertation.scriv?id=385}}\
The evolutionary debunking argument proceeds as follows:\
1. If moral belief that P is explained by evolutionary processes, then the belief is not warranted. \
2. Moral beliefs are explained by evolutionary processes. \
3. Therefore, all moral beliefs are not warranted. \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl448\sa140

\b \cf2 We are a mess\

\b0 A satisfactory life, Williams objects, is not possible for evolved creatures. We are \'93doomed to be sub-optimal.\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs26 Brown 112. %
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 Brown is willing to concede this point. But he thinks it not devastating. \'93We should not expect to be fully happy, insofar as happiness requires an ideal match between our evolved psychological processes and current environments.\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs26 Brown 112. %
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 \
\
Brown concedes that a 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
completely 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
satisfactory life is perhaps not possible. That is, if we take \'91satisfactory\'92 to be denoting the subjective state of the human, \'93this is not a problem for a naturalistic ethical theory that makes no assumptions about the possibility of human happiness.\'94 
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs26 Brown 106.% 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 So Brown\'92s concession \'97 and Williams\'92 objection \'97 tells against eudaemonism but not a fully naturalized virtue ethic. Brown suggests (to my mind, suggests rather weakly) that \'93Aristotle thinks [the fully virtuous human being] will be happier than someone who lacks the virtues\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs26 Brown 106. %
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 \
\
A 
\b response
\b0 : I find this sanguine interpretation of Aristotle far too quick. \
The philosopher who wrote that \'93the activity of this in accordance with its proper virtue will be perfect happiness\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs26 Aristotle, 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Nicomachean Ethics, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Book X. %
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\'93
\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
If happiness is activity in accordance with virtue, it is reasonable that it should be in accordance with the highest virtue; and this will be that of the best thing in us. Whether it be reason or something else that is this element which is thought to be our natural ruler and guide and to take thought of things noble and divine, whether it be itself also divine or only the most divine element in us, the activity of this in accordance with its proper virtue will be perfect happiness.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93But such a life would be too high for man; for it is not in so far as he is man that he will live so, but in so far as something divine is present in him; and by so much as this is superior to our composite nature is its activity superior to that which is the exercise of the other kind of virtue. If reason is divine, then, in comparison with man, the life according to it is divine in comparison with human life. But we must not follow those who advise us, being men, to think of human things, and, being mortal, of mortal things, but must, so far as we can, make ourselves immortal, and strain every nerve to live in accordance with the best thing in us; for even if it be small in bulk, much more does it in power and worth surpass everything. This would seem, too, to be each man himself, since it is the authoritative and better part of him. It would be strange, then, if he were to choose not the life of his self but that of something else. And what we said before' will apply now; that which is proper to each thing is by nature best and most pleasant for each thing; for man, therefore, the life according to reason is best and pleasantest, since reason more than anything else is man. This life therefore is also the happiest.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl448\sa140

\fs26 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\

\b A response: 
\b0 Brown confidentially assuring us that perfect virtuousness, suboptimal functioning, and full happiness are not possible is sort of like a visitor to Kentucky confidently assuring us that there is no such thing as the perfect bourbon whiskey. Meanwhile, we are sipping on a nice mellow two fingers of Woodford Reserve on the rocks, none the wiser. Poor us. Brown is not persuading me about the possibility of happiness and virtue; he is confessing that he does\'92t know many happy and virtuous folks. I suggested that one aspect of criteria four above might be that our ethical theory explain 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
why 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
joyful people are joyful, explain the phenomenon of powerful and glorious happiness. These people are empirical data. Their lives give the lie to this false pessimism Brown is preaching. \
\

\b Our end is reproductive success which may not even be good? 
\b0 \
Brown aims for a \'93theoretical unification\'94 of the \'94natural human ends\'94 of which virtues \'93reliably enable the realisation [sic %]\'94.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs26 Brown 113. %
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 He understands that a resistance to this conclusion might drive some philosophers to give up on theoretical unification, or to give up on ethical theorizing altogether. But he thinks following the argument worthwhile. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f1\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\{\\Scrv_ps=
\f0\fs26 The de facto end of evolutionary processes is reproductive success. Perhaps reproductive success is the ultimate end to which the other four characteristic ends are only proximate? The good functioning of the social group does after all contribute to the survival of the members of the group and of the species. In this final chapter, all the living richness of Aristotle\'92s ethics and all the careful and contoured considerations Brown has constructed flatline into the simple, monolithic, two-dimensional plane of survival. The only possible ultimate natural end of human life is reproductive success. Brown\'92s almost hypnotic repetition of the phrase \'93reproductive success\'94 emphasizes his insistence on according his philosophical view with the current scientistic vogue. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl448\sa140

\f1\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_ps\}
\f0\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 \
The final worry Brown considers whether this ultimate end is even 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
good. 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
His answer is that Aristotle was right: the good is that at which all people aim. And all people aim at reproductive success. So (perhaps) reproductive success is good.  \
He admits that he hasn\'92t really answered the question. \'93That is all the naturalist has\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs26 Brown 122. % 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
It is desired but is it 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
desirable? 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
It is loved but is it lovable? It is praised but is it praiseworthy? It is valued but is it really valuable? \
\
A response: if the end of 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
all 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
biological life is the same (reproductive success) then there is no unique end for each species. Hence there is no unique end for humans. This conclusion fits with Brown\'92s earlier claim that we have no purpose. But it contradicts Aristotle\'92s scheme that each 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
logos 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
includes a unique end, which is one of the properties that differentiates it from other species. It contradicts the notion (that Brown seems to accept) that we can identify a thing\'92s function by empirically researching its characteristic functions. He is not willing to take that notion out to inanimate objects \'97 we should not conclude that stars aim to twinkle on the basis of the empirical observation that they twinkle better than asteroids. (The unwillingness to accept this conclusion rests more rhetorical force, perhaps, on the word \'91twinkle\'92 than on the ridiculousness of the thought.) But he has not commented on whether the notion applies universally for animate objects. What would be his response? \
\
\'93
\f2 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The naturalized virtue ethics advanced by Brown is a goods-based view according to which the goodness of the virtues derives from the goodness of our ultimate end. So virtues, while not theoretically fundamental, are ethically fundamental; they are the marks for which we look when evaluating individual human beings as good instances of the kind human being.\'94 Former O\'92Hagan\'92s review ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://ndpr.nd.edu/news/23896-moral-virtue-and-nature-a-defense-of-ethical-naturalism/"}}{\fldrslt https://ndpr.nd.edu/news/23896-moral-virtue-and-nature-a-defense-of-ethical-naturalism/}})}