{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 The philosophical ethics presented in these pages aims to be a species of moral realism and moral objectivism inextricable from normative virtue theory. \
Of course, defending moral realism from its objectors would be the task of another book. The ethical writer of the early 21\super st\nosupersub  century is fortunate to be able to stand on the shoulders of Russ Scaeffer-Landau, Terrence Cuneo, and David Enoch. In this section I did not attend anything like a defensive moral realism against all devils advocates, nor a complete summary of the arguments of these three writers. Rather, I use a few of what I take to be there most incisive arguments to form a presumptive case in favor of moral realism. This presumption, while not invincible, will be enough to form a foundation for a debate that more fervently animates virtue theorists: the debate between subjectivist realism (constructivism) and objectivist realism (\'93robust realism\'94 (Enoch 2011), \'93stance-independent\'94 realism (Shafer-Landau 2003)). That debate I enter{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://376C96D4-BF59-449C-B7F6-24B67BBF64C1"}}{\fldrslt  in the chapters on Hursthouse and McDowell. }}\
The presumptive case is a simple abduction: Our moral discourse has \'93objective purport\'94. All people, everywhere, for all of recorded history, argue over right and wrong. The best explanation of this is that the real moral facts and genuine moral truths d exist but are hard to discover.  For we do not argue over purely subjective matters: \'93I like mint ice cream.\'94 \'93No, you don\'92t!\'94 And we do not argue over objective matters that are easy. \'93That book weighs five pounds.\'94 \'93No, I just weighed it on this reliable scale: it\'92s 4 pounds.\'94 \'93Oh!\'94 We argue over objective matters that are difficult, like the most fair and most effective method of gathering taxes from a population, or the permissibility of aborting fetuses. \
The objections to moral realism often begin with an 
\i aporia 
\i0 regarding disagreement. But how is moral disagreement a problem for moral realism? David Enoch\'92s delightfully Socratic question stops us in our tracks. To answer this question by simply asserting \'93it isn\'92t\'94 seems strange and bold and daring in today\'92s moral milieu. But it isn\'92t. People give conflicting and mutually incompatible answers to objective questions all the time in physics, in evolutionary biology, in computer science, in every day life. If both parties can\'92t both be right, then one or both parties are mistaken. If party A thinks taxes should be a flat 14.4% rate gathered from everyone, and pay B thinks taxes should be an ascending rate from 8%-35% depending on income, then, all else being equal, either one is mistaken (the other being right) or both are mistaken (and some third thesis is correct). \
That we should allow this presumption to have some weight in our inquiry needs some defense. Virtue theory is perhaps the oldest kind of ethical theory, taking ethical 
\i theory 
\i0 to be a reflection upon and rarified version of ordinary, commonsense traditional morality. The virtues ethicists defend are not automatic social norms promoted and defended, knee-jerk-like. But neither are the virtues they defend pulled whole out of Plato\'92s heaven, abstract, pure, and unconnected to upbringing in a family, society, and tradition. Rather, the virtues defended are polished, trimmed, versions of the raw material supplied by family, society, and tradition. \
Moral disagreement arises in cultures whose entire moral traditions are at odds. Moral traditions include forms of life encompassing education, the value placed on family (child-bearing and child-rearing), a notion of what are social goods, a notion of what counts as success, and a definition of death. Moral traditions arise from, I would guess, a variety of factors, but to speculate on that origination is beyond me. Within moral traditions, relationships are characterized by an astonishing degree of moral 
\i agreement. 
\i0 In 1920}