{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 6. **Justification of Morality Objection.** \
\
I am indebted to @dandrea2006tradition for his illuminating explication and discussion of this objection, which he points out that Philippa Foot (inter alia) levels against MacIntyre: after all the informative and wide-ranging historical analysis, MacIntyre\'92s account does not solve the \'93problem posed by Plato, and never solved \'85 that of showing the rationality, for any man, of a thorough-going acceptance of the restraints of justice.\'94[@foot1981] This is the \'93problem of immoralism\'94 she tries to address in the final chapter of her *Natural Goodness*, which I shall discuss in a later chapter.\
\
##### Will I discuss it in a later chapter? If not remove that sentence. \
\
The challenge of a Nietzsche or Callicles or Thrasymachus lies in their acceptance that the good life for humans *requires* some virtues or requires virtue in some sense but their rejection of the \'93robust concept of justice with its corresponding constraints on action.\'94[@dandrea2006tradition 430]\
\
One response is that the \'93why be moral?\'94 question is never asked in the abstract. The person who succeeds in sincerely asking it, if that person is not a hypothetical thought experiment in a piece of philosophical writing, then that person is by definition an outcast from their own society. The emergence of the doubt as to whether one should be moral, and the crystallization of the doubt into an articulate challenge, is *a political failure*. The polis to which the moral skeptic belongs has failed him. The moral skeptic, likewise, has failed the polis which belongs to him. Parents, teachers, religious leaders, politicians, businesses, and non-profit organizations all have a hand in giving each member of the community the tradition out of which the community arises and within which abstract philosophical or pseudo-philosophical worries such as \'93What does it all mean?\'94 simply do not arise. \
\
If we specify the immoralist, we can identify at least three particular types. \
\
The first let\'92s call the inert. The inert has no reasons for acting and no (sub-rational) impulses whatsoever and so does not act at all. Bartleby the Scrivener is an example of the inert. Possibly, Nietzsche by the end of his life had succumbed to mental illness of this kind. (For though mental illness is not intelligible to the mentally ill, it may be intelligible to the mentally stable.) The inert cannot reflect upon his maxims of action nor give account of them because he has lost the motivation even to think or speak. \
\
The second let\'92s call the irrationalist. The irrationalist has no reasons for acting whatsoever, but does have sub-rational impulses that cause him to move about. Frost in C. S. Lewis\'92 novel 
\i That Hideous Strength 
\i0 is an example. This person has become a beast. Beast has a negative connotation. \'91Beast\'92 connotes a \'93lower animal\'94 and somehow less valuable than a human. In this context, I mean both: a human beast is someone who has become a lower than human animal and such a person is defective qua human. The irrationalist cannot summon an account of his reasons for action because, ex hypothesis, he *has* none. When asked he would only grunt, squawk, or burble. \
\
The third let\'92s call the immoralist. The immoralist has reasons for acting but denies or renounces *some* worthwhile reasons for acting. They are *inconsistent* but not irrational. Thrasymachus may be such a type. The immoralist can reflect \'97 even intelligently reflect \'97 upon his maxims for action and can give *an* account; but will only do so if it seems good to do so by his own immoralist principles. In other words, a consistent egoist will not preach egoism unless it advances his own self-interest; he will not preach egoism for the sake of the listener, for that would be to give up his egoism. The aesthete pleasure-lover will not take a break from wanton revelry to preach indulgence unless he happens to (also) enjoy preaching as much as wanton revelry. The immoralist is not the person who has no practical reasons; it is the person who has too few practical reasons. \
\
The fourth let\'92s call the incoherent. The incoherent, while he claims to have reasons for acting, does not act on *those* maxims but on different ones. When called upon to give account of his reasons for action, he will summon maxims that apparently bear no relation to the ones upon which he acts. Sunday in G. K. Chesterton\'92s 
\i The Man Who Was Thursday 
\i0 is perhaps a type of such a character. }