{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red20\green20\blue20;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid2\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid102\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid202\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid3}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 The MetaEthics of Virtue\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Toward a Metaethics of Virtue \
Toward a Metaethical Grounding of Virtue\
Back to Virtue: Toward a Complete Metaethics\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
In this dissertation, I trace the growth and elaboration of a virtue ethics from Anscombe to the present day in which the core concepts (virtue, happiness, practical reason) can withstand all the objections posed against them and which, now as ever, explains much or all of our ethical discourse powerfully and satisfyingly. \
\
So, for each thinker MacIntyre, Foot, Hursthouse, McDowell, Brown, and Adams\'85\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	1.	}What is a virtue? (Ethics) Disposition?\
{\listtext	2.	}Why be virtuous? (Motivation) \
{\listtext	3.	}What is happiness? (Teleology)\
{\listtext	4.	}Human Nature\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}Is human nature 
\i natural
\i0 ?
\i  
\i0 (metaphysics)\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls2\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}What is practical reason? (Epistemology)\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls3\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}Is human nature (reason, virtue) divine? (Philosophy of religion)\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	1.	}Is happiness possible? (Ethics)\
{\listtext	2.	}How do we adjudicate moral disagreement (metaethics)\
{\listtext	3.	}How do virtues involve the emotions? (Psychology) \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Not answered\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 9. Virtue and right action \'97 how do we put virtues into action? (Normative ethics)\
10. Virtue and education \'97 how do we help children? (Education)\
11. Virtue and contentious questions (applied ethics)\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Virtue theory as \'93bottom-up\'94 and grounded in common morality. 
\b0 Common morality gathers examples of traits \'97 like honesty \'97 that seem objectively good (or traits like dishonesty) that seem objectively bad. Common moralists cite ethical concepts (like justice and injustice), traits (like kindness and cruelty), actions (like murder and charitable giving). Beauchamp and Childress, for instance, build a list of ten actions. \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93(1) Don\'92t kill; (2) Don\'92t cause pain or suffering to others; (3) Prevent evil and harm from occurring; \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560
\cf0 (4) Rescue persons in danger; (5) Tell the truth; (6) Nurture the young and dependents; (7) Keep your promises; (8) Don\'92t steal; (9) Don\'92t punish the innocent; (10) Treat all persons with equal moral consideration.\'94
\f2\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\i\fs28 Principles of Biomedical Ethics %
\f2\i0\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  \
	The theoretical goals of reflecting on these principles of common morality are:\
A) to identify some principles, if any, that underly and unify this shopping list of moral laws;\
B) to ground these laws or their underlying principles in reason, or the divine will, or human nature, or something more objective than mere \'93objective purport.\'94\
C) To provide theoretical unification or at least a kind of reflective equilibrium with our best scientific accounts of humanity and of nature. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420\sa200
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93Normative ethical theories vary considerably in terms of their aspirations towards generalization, universality, abstractness, systematic organization, simplicity, and comprehensiveness (Nussbaum 2000, Flynn 2007)\'85Although most philosophers might naturally think of such highly abstract and ambitious constructions as paradigmatic examples of moral theory, and most likely have precisely such theories in mind when asked about the relationships between bioethics and ethical theory, they do not exhaust the space of normative theorizing either in bioethics or within the moral life more generally.\'94
\f2\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 John Arras, \'93Theory and Bioethics\'94, 
\i The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, (
\i0 Summer 2013 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).\

\f2\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 That is, particular religious and social traditions have retained their own account of virtues embedded in the practices and life of those traditions. They have no need of \'93ethical theory\'94 in the way that a person shipwrecked without a tradition or stranded on a tradition of moral confusion has need of ethical theory. But those of us who belong to the Aristotelian and Christian virtue tradition can, for the benefit of those outside, articulate a theoretical version of the embodied moral life with which we are familiar in the persons of our exemplars. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl560
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	The accounts I will consider differ from each other and my own. But they each contribute to one narrative. That narrative is the origin and growth of a tenable analytic metaethical defense of a particular virtue ethics. \
	My own view (not defended here) is that the normative tenet that we ought to become just, and courageous, and wise, and moderate is an extremely useful and even inspiring law of life. Useful, because there are many paths through life and our heroes may or may not be imitable in the particulars; they may be of a different sex, or a different age, or a different chosen profession, or a different culture, etc. But virtues (or many virtues) are good in a manner that transcends time, place, and culture. And normative virtue ethics are inspiring because our human life is very frail and very fragile, but virtue and wisdom are lasting. Even if the human person does not survive death (as I think it does), the memory of virtuous persons survives death. We remember and celebrate those who achieved exemplary kindness, compassion, justice, fortitude. We even remember and celebrate those who achieved exemplary wit, like Groucho Marx (about whom I\'92ve never heard an ill word spoken) or exemplary talent, like Leonardo Da Vinci. We remember them for good reason, and celebrate them rightly: because their example is worth following in our own lives. Our longing for immortality, whether ultimately futile or ultimately vindicated, can be channeled into the zealous pursuit of those personal qualities that are universally admired, praised, and commended and into the zealous avoidance of those qualities there universally despised, blamed, and criticized. \
	Believing these things, I want to commend a life of the pursuit of virtue and wisdom to as many as will attend to the use and motivational power of virtue. Reasonable objections may be posed against such a pursuit and such a life. I want to overcome as many reasonable objections as possible. (Unreasonable objections are their own reward.)\
	\
	So our story begins with Alisdair MacIntyre. To him we will now move. }