{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The concept of tradition does important work for MacIntyre. A tradition is not mere conservatism of Burke or contemporary political pundits; that kind of conservatism is part of the broader tradition of liberal individualism he critiques. He calls a living tradition \'93an historically extended, socially embodied argument, and an argument precisely in part about the goods which constitute that tradition\'94 (222%). \
The book that works out more fully his theory of tradition is 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Whose Justice? Which Rationality? 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Here, he tells the story of \'93three distinct traditions, from Homer to Aristotle to Thomas Aquinas, from Augustine to Thomas Aquinas, and from Augustine through Calvin to Hume)\'94 (Lutz %). The modern liberalism of the Enlightenment and beyond denies being a tradition or having a tradition, yet bears all the telling marks of a tradition. \
This book also works out a theory of rationality. Rather than the disembodied, timeless, and universal concept of rationality touted in the French Enlightenment (the goddess Reason), he argues that one\'92s conception of rationality is something constituted by one\'92s tradition. \
\'93Reason\'94 for MacIntyre is not a bare calculative faculty but a whole messy bundle of ways of assessing truth and falsehood. }