{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 This chapter is about:\
* Nature and science\
* The metaethics of ethics\
* The metaphysics of ethics\
* Nature & Naturalism; Science & Scientism\
* Indexing \'93Nature\'94 to \'93Science\'94\
* The Demarcation problem. \
\
\
Thesis Draft 1: Naturalism is not false. But all its claim either necessarily true (a tautology), or trivial, or false. \
So for instance, the claim that all is physical is false because minds, mental contents, propositions, sets, moral values, epistemic norms, logical laws, mathematical properties and relations are real but not physical. \
The claim that all that is real emerges from or strongly supervenes on the physical is false because minds have top-down causation and chains of reasoning constituted by ground-consequent relations (like this one) cannot be reduced to chains of cause-effect relations while retaining their normative force. \
Naturalists must define science. But we cannot. The demarcation problem makes this impossible for them to do with satisfaction. I define a science as a body of knowledge, whether empirical or abstract, whether explanatory or predictive, whether inductive or deductive. In other words, I define science is knowledge and true opinion as opposed to false opinion (for there is no such thing as false knowledge). By my definition,  logic, mathematics, metaphysics, and theology are sciences and I defy anyone to prove that they are not. The claim that science is our \'93best way of knowing about the world\'94 is a true, since \'93knowing is our best way of knowing what can be known\'94 is necessarily true. \
The claim that science is the 
\i only 
\i0 way of knowing about what is real is similarly tautologous. What else would we trust but 
\i scientia? \

\i0 The claim that some of the biologists, geologists, archeologists, astronomers, medical doctors, and cosmologists (let us call them by their old name: natural philosophers) have achieved great advances in knowledge is true but trivial. What theist would disagree? But most of these natural philosophers, like Galileo, Copernicus, and yes even Einstein, were also theists. \
The claim that god doesn\'92t exist must be assessed in its own argument. But it can\'92t be made inductively by pointing out all the places and times gods are not apparent and concluding via the absence of evidence that gods are in no place and no time. \
\
The word naturalism does not denote a doctrine; it 
\i connotes. 
\i0 The real error of naturalists is that they don\'92t have anything to denote; they only have connotations, innuendos, provocative suggestions. They wealthy with knowing nods and dismissive asides; but we are so poor we don\'92t yet have a dogma. \
\
\
The examples of philosophers trying (or studiously avoiding trying) to define \'91nature\'92 or \'91natural\'92 are embarrassing: \
\'93
\f1\fs40 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Since it is notoriously difficult to define what a natural property is, I will not attempt to give a precise definition.
\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up18 1 
\fs40 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 Instead, I will act on the supposition that such an account can be given.\'94
\f2\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f1\fs40 Attila Tanyi, \'93Naturalism and Triviality\'94 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Philosophical Writings, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
No. 32. Summer 2006. 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f2\i0\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f1\fs40 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 }