{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 #### Incoherence of the concept 'Tradition' and rationality Objection\
\
The set of relativism objections and replies to them push us to articulate more clearly MacIntyre\'92s theory of rationality. Ethical reasoning is practical reasoning; and practical reason is a mode of *reasoning* per se, a mode of practical rationality in action. Living well depends on thinking well, though of course thinking well is merely necessary and not sufficient for living well. \
\
For this reason, the last objection Stephen Lutz discusses under the heading of \'93relativism\'94 I shall discuss under the heading of \'93tradition-constituted rationality.\'94 The objection is twofold: first, is MacIntyre\'92s concept of tradition-constituted rationality even coherent? Second, is it clear enough to be an indispensable feature of an ethical theory? \
\
 MacIntyre says on the one hand that, according to Tradition A, X is rational. According to Tradition B, X is not rational. They disagree and seem to genuinely disagree. A member of Tradition A can reasonably affirm that X cannot be both rational and irrational. Now, MacIntyre says that a member of Tradition B can discover some internal contradiction in Tradition B that makes her reconsider her tradition as aw hole. Perhaps she discovers that, according to Tradition B, Z is both rational and irrational. She is disconcerted by the contradiction. She decides to imaginatively entertain the possibility that Tradition A is more adequate and comes to see, over time, that Tradition A\'92s critique of Tradition B is compelling. The odd conclusion is this: affirming a contradiction is irrational for anyone in any Tradition. Now, I endorse this conclusion; if someone affirms a contradiction, and they persist in it in spite of repeated attempts to explain to them the contradiction, I would find them not just mistaken but fundamentally mentally impaired \'97  irrational. But the point is not whether the law of non-contradiction is true and a reliable criterion of rationality. The point is that MacIntyre cannot say so without contradicting himself. \
\
Suppose first that Tradition A teaches that logical contradictions are irrational, while Tradition B teaches that logical contradictions can be rational. Then the member of Tradition B that affirms a contradiction (Z is both rational and irrational) will not, by her own standards, see a problem with her affirmation. A member of Tradition A will see the problem (by his own standards), but this is nothing surprising or new. The member of Tradition B has in principle no path out of her tradition, no motivation to see her tradition as mistaken, and hence no motivation to consider Tradition A. \
\
Suppose now that Tradition A teaches that logical contradictions are irrational and Tradition B teaches the same. Now, according to MacIntyre, they agree (at least on this point) about a standard of rationality. They disagree about whether Z is rational or not, but they agree that Z cannot be both irrational and rational at the same time in the same respect. Are Tradition A and B now part of the same tradition, since they agree about the law of non-contradiction? Or are they different traditions, since they disagree about the rationality of Z? \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 #### Incoherence of Tradition Objection Reply
\b0 \
\
I think it true that tradition influences our standards of rationality, justice, and virtue, but demonstrably false that it *constitutes* such standards. The law of non-contradiction is the counterexample. \
\
Every tradition affirms the law of non-contradiction; every tradition denies rational agents the right to believe (P & ~P). Any tradition that denies the law of non-contradiction, it seems to me, is an irrational tradition. And I don\'92t just intend to say it is irrational relative to my own standards of rationality, but that it is irrational full stop and possible to \'93step outside\'94 my tradition far enough to see that. If there even does exist any person (such as Nagarjuna) or community or tradition that affirms (P & ~P), we ought not interpret them as having a different standard of rationality but rather we ought to interpret them as believing that rationality is an obstacle to nirvana. Affirming contradictions is still irrational, but it is the kind of irrationality needed to do violence to the limits of rationality and transcend them. \
\
So I think MacIntyre\'92s unqualified claims about tradition constituting rationality should be limited to claims about other standards for acceptable kinds of evidence, etc.\
\

\b \
#### Clarity \'97 the Definition of tradition ####\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
A different angle to the same objection is the very definition of the term \'91tradition.\'92 Some readers, such as John Haldane, question MacIntyre\'92s ability coherently to identify what a tradition is. Call this the Differentiation Problem. Are two traditions separate and hence identifiable only if they are incommensurable? How much difference constitutes separation? How much overlap is compatible with difference? Jewish and Christian traditions share a common origin and bear considerable overlap in authorities, scriptures, and doctrines. \
\
MacIntyre\'92s definition makes such teasing out difficult. He characterizes a tradition as \'93separate and unified when its members or texts have a core set of shared commitments to beliefs, when the tradition is situated in a particular context in a particular set of institutions and when the tradition has an identifiable linguistic difference when compared to other traditions.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 83] \
\
The response that Weinstein gives is this. We should not expect, by MacIntyre\'92s lights, that there is an automatically objective, view-from-nowhere by which we can define tradition itself. Rather, MacIntyre concludes that \'93the concept of a tradition, together with the criteria for its use and application, is itself one developed from within one particular tradition-based standpoint. This does not preclude its application to the very tradition within which it was developed.\'94[@horton1994after 295] This is liable to frustrate some readers. But the alternative (by MacIntyre\'92s lights) is intellectual imperialism wherein one tradition has the *real* scoop on every other tradition. MacIntyre grants that his self-definition of his own tradition arises, in part, from his criteria of that tradition. Traditions change over time. They progress (according to their own unchanging standards) toward unchanging goals or else they abandon old standards. \
\
I think MacIntyre\'92s solution stands or falls with his theory of rationality and practical rationality, which is, of course, tradition-constituted. This may not satisfy critiques but it cordons off their objections. It pushes back, to demand that the critics self-reflect and specify their own tradition (in MacIntyre\'92s words) even as they demand a definition of the term \'91tradition\'92 (in their own words). \
\
\
####
\b  Justification of Morality Objection #### 
\b0 \
\
I would like to expand this objection by appeal to a slightly different one. I am indebted to @dandrea2006tradition for his illuminating explication and discussion of this objection. He points out that Philippa Foot (inter alia) levels against MacIntyre: after all the informative and wide-ranging historical analysis, MacIntyre\'92s account does not solve the \'93problem posed by Plato, and never solved \'85 that of showing the rationality, for any man, of a thorough-going acceptance of the restraints of justice.\'94[@foot1981] This is the \'93problem of immoralism\'94 she tries to address in the final chapter of her *Natural Goodness*, which I shall discuss in a later chapter.\
\
// Will I discuss it in a later chapter? If not remove that sentence. \
\
The challenge of a Nietzsche or Callicles or Thrasymachus lies in their acceptance that the good life for humans *requires* some virtues or requires virtue in some sense but their rejection of the \'93robust concept of justice with its corresponding constraints on action.\'94[@dandrea2006tradition 430]\
\
One response is this: the question \'93why be moral?\'94 is never asked in the abstract. Philosophers often pose the \'93why be moral?\'94 question hypothetically, as if they were skeptics of one or another sort. But such an idealized moral skeptic will not do. And a non-hypothetical, non-idealized skeptic faces a problem, on MacIntyre\'92s theory. \
\
That problem is that if they are full-fledged members of their tradition, the \'93why be moral?\'94 question usually does not arise. There are two exceptions: The first when persons who succeed in sincerely asking the \'93why be moral?\'94 question who are, by definition, outcasts from their own society. The emergence of the doubt as to whether one should be moral, and the crystallization of the doubt into an articulate challenge, is *a political failure*. The *polis* to which the moral skeptic belongs has failed him. The moral skeptic, likewise, has failed the *polis* which belongs to him. Parents, teachers, religious leaders, politicians, businesses, and non-profit organizations all have a hand in giving each member of the community the tradition out of which the community arises and within which abstract philosophical or pseudo-philosophical worries such as \'93What does it all mean?\'94 simply do not arise. \
\
In drawing the distinction between the modern "emotivist self" and the "self of the heroic age" MacIntyre says, \'93In heroic society there is no 'outside except that of the stranger. A man who tried to withdraw himself from his given position in heroic society would be engaged in the enterprise of trying to make himself disappear.\'94[@macintyre1984after 126] In one sense, MacIntyre *dissolves* this worry. His strategy is not to give the skeptical \'93why be moral?\'94 question the devil\'92s due and solve it on its own conditions; his strategy is to undermine the conditions of asking it. \
\
\
\
The second exception is when moral skeptics *are* members of their own tradition but are seeing the problems within their own tradition and are troubled by a \'93border tradition\'94. This skeptic sees the resources of a rival tradition and compares such favorably with the resources of his own tradition. He is, in a word, entering epistemological crisis. And to such a skeptic, MacIntyre\'92s theory invites him or her to do the hard work of resolving that crisis by examining, from within the context of a primary tradition *and* a \'93second first\'94 tradition, the problems at hand and the available solutions, working toward an ever greater understanding of the truth. \
\
For this reason, again, I think MacIntyre\'92s solution stands or falls with his theory of rationality and practical rationality, which is, of course, tradition-constituted. }