{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs20 \cf0 ### Kuhn\
The story of his avoidance of despair and deconstructionism is an interesting one. He was deeply moved by Thomas Kuhn's influential work on the structure of revolution between various paradigms in the natural sciences.[@kuhn1975structure] What if a similar structure obtained in scientific revolutions and in moral revolutions? Anyone familiar with Kuhn's watershed *Structure of Scientific Revolutions* has felt the significance of his provocative argument. MacIntyre began to speculate about the possibility that Kuhn's (and Feyerabend\'92s) analyses of scientific progress and scientific crisis could be fruitfully applied to ethics. His 1977 essay on epistemological crises was his own version of Kuhn's *Structure of Scientific Revolutions* -- we might call this essay MacIntyre's "Structure of Ethical Revolutions".[@macintyre1977epistemological] \
\
### Kuhn's method and paradigm\
Now, Kuhn concluded his study in a radical pluralism about rationality and methodology. This smacks of a scientific relativism unpalatable to many scientific realists. Paul Feyerabend cheerfully embraced this possibility. He argued for "epistemological anarchism," where *any* method will do as long as it is "fruitful."[@feyerabend1993against] He thought that "rationality" and "science" were merely bully terms with sociological power to club dissenters from the dominant paradigm into submission. MacIntyre took a different tack.\
\
Kuhn's concept of a paradigm is a nice analogue for MacIntyre's concept of a tradition. The concept of "tradition" is liable to fatal misunderstanding. I should be cutting off the Hydra\'92s immortal head if I were to explain it at the outset.}