{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##
\b Arthur Balfour and Lloyd Morgan
\b0 \
\
About the same time that G. E. Moore was busy inventing analytic metaethics, the British philosopher and politician Arthur Balfour was composing a fascinating monograph called *Theism and Humanism.* Arthur Balfour\'92s *Theism and Humanism* develops an argument from naturalism against naturalism that runs as follows: \
\
>[There is] no distinction to be drawn between the development of reason and that of any other faculty, physiological or psychical, by which the interests of the individual or the race are promoted. From the humblest form of nervous irritation at the one end of the scale, to the reasoning capacity of the most advanced races at the other, everything without exception (sensation, instinct, desire, volition) has been produced directly or indirectly, by natural causes acting for the most part on strictly utilitarian principles. Convenience, not knowledge, therefore, has been the main end to which this process has tended.[@balfour 68].\
\
And again: \
>Taking naturalism as our guiding principle we can hardly doubt that the august sentiments which cling to the ideas of duty and sacrifice are nothing better than a device of nature to trick us into the performance of altruistic actions.[@balfour 15]\
\
In my own words: \
any conclusion is false if the conclusion of the argument contradicts the objective truth-finding ability of the very faculty of reason by which we gathered the premises in favor of the conclusion.  \
Let A be the proposition that: reason is a truth-finding faculty that is at least occasionally reliable at discovering true propositions. \
Let B be the proposition that: Natural selection is responsible for the state of the current state of the brain, its functions, abilities, etc. \
And let C be the proposition that: Natural selection selects for survival-conducive properties. \
\
1. If A then B.\
2. If B then C.\
3. A. \
3. B.\
4. Therefore C. \
5. If C, then not-A. \
6. Not-A. \
\
1. The brain exhibits truth-finding properties, then we can learn that natural selection selects for survival-conducive properties. \
2. If natural selection selects for survival-conducive properties only,  4. natural selection is entirely responsible for the brain's functioning, \
3. The brain exhibits truth-finding properties\
4. natural selection is entirely responsible for the brain's functioning, \
If natural selection selects for survival-conducive properties only, then the brain does not exhibit truth-finding properties. \
5. The brain does not exhibit truth-finding properties. \
\
\
\
This argument type is picked up by a philosophical if popular journalist (G. K. Chesterton in *Orthodoxy*), a philosophical and literary scholar (C. S. Lewis in *Miracles*), and contemporary philosophers (Alvin Plantinga in *Where the Conflict Really Lies*, and Thomas Nagel in *Mind and Cosmos*). \
\
The problem with the argument is not only that it contains a contradiction (that is bad enough). The problem is also that it undermines *all truth claims* including, of course, the truth claims that lead us to believe in things like natural selection. \
\
Lloyd Morgan\'92s review of Balfour\'92s book calls it \'93one of the most remarkable books of modern times.\'94[@morgan] Yet he differs from Balfour\'92s conclusions on almost every point. His responses are instructive. Morgan sees that natural selection produce humans, but that humans and rationality have advanced beyond the initial state produced. Natural selection, we might say, is only the indirect producer of human rationality, ethical ideals, and so on. \
\
Furthermore, naturalism is not opposed to supernaturalism. \'93[W]e are far from denying the existence or the all-pervading influence of the supernatural ; nay, rather we are laying firmly the foundations of a belief based not on rationalism, but on idealism. We contend for the natural and intrinsic nobility of man at his best and highest, and see therein the foundations of his religious ideals.\'94[@morgan 84] Morgan does not flesh out these contentions much. But he somehow sees in naturalism not a refutation of \'93supernaturalism\'94 or idealism but a basis for it. \
\
Morgan\'92s naturalism is simply a method of sticking \'93close to the realities that are given in practical experience; and to remember that every step in analysis takes us so much further from the reality from which we start.\'94[@morgan 86] By this light, the physicist who says a tree in the next field is \'93nothing but matter and energy\'94 and the psychologist who says the tree is \'93nothing but sensations ... combined\'94 may both be right but there is also a tree in the next field. The bottom line is that the \'93criterion of reality\'94 is \'93direct experience\'94 rather than \'93that which remains after the most ... rigorous analysis\'94 [@morgan 88]. Morgan affirms both sides of the objective/subjective divide, whether the results of intense experimental study or intense introspective analysis, since \'93nothing ... can be more real than a bit of practical experience in the moment of that experience; and if in analysis we distinguish therein an objective aspect on the one hand and a subjective aspect on the other hand, let us remember that these two are of strictly co-ordinate reality.\'94[@morgan 89]}