{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green26\blue26;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs26 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Hi Dr. Bradshaw,\
\
I'm wondering if you have some time to sit down in the next couple of weeks and talk about dissertation direction.\'a0\
\
The thought hit me pretty hard two weeks ago that I might want to adjust my research direction towards naturalism, specifically ethics and philosophy of mind.\'a0\
\
Here's my thinking. I've wanted to and planned to study ancient at a professional academic level since 2005. My two heroes from that season of life were Platonists. I read a lot of Plato, Plotinus, Proclus, as well as some classic scholarship like Conford, J.A. Stewart, and others. I did and still consider Plato my "master" when it comes to thinking, teaching, and dialoguing. It just made sense. I haven't read as much of the secondary scholarship as I will need to, of course, but there is time for that in the coming years.\'a0\
\
Two things changed. Firstly, I realized that I haven't been able to take many ancient classes. Eric's 500 level Greek Metaphysics class, his Parmenides seminar and your Aristotle independent study are the only three. The rest have been in ethics (Anita, Tim) or philosophy of mind (Clare) or Kant (Stefan). I did email Eric and he graciously agreed to be on my committee. But with him on sabbatical this semester and your naturalism class, I am realizing that my time for more Ancient seminars is quickly running short. (Of course, independent studies or focused reading classes could do much on this front.)\
\
Secondly, I reflected on the papers I've been writing and simply found that naturalism is on my mind. At Talbot, I took a metaphysics class and a philosophy of mind class that were both aimed at setting up and critiquing naturalistic alternatives to classical theism. Here, my first seminar Kant paper for Stefan was all about how McDowell's 'second nature' might compatible with non-naturalistic theism. My paper for Aristotle and Aristotelians on Mind was all about a non-naturalistic (hylomorphic) account of the mind. My paper for Philosophy of Religion was about how miracles are likely in spite of naturalistic prejudices. My paper for Tim's metaethics class was all about how Gibbard's norm-expressivism fails to live up to its own naturalistic standards, and thus indicts ethical naturalism. My most recent paper for Clare is not directly about naturalism but is closely in dialogue with the naturalists while arguing for a virtue ethical or moral realist view of imagination. (And now this paper has been accepted for a conference.)\'a0\
\
It just strikes me that naturalism, philosophy of mind, and ethics are on my mind.\'a0\
\
So this provokes the question: should I continue that apparent mental "momentum" into my doctoral research or stay the course with my decade long intention and do ancient?\'a0\
\
(I do not think answering this question is quite the urgent matter that it feels to me at the moment. I probably have a year before I have to answer it. Nevertheless, I want to plod in the right direction.)\
\
\
There are five self-reflections I am wrestling with and trying to weigh (and hence would covet your feedback). Please forgive the inevitable narcissism the following inquiry involves.\'a0\
\
1) Since I haven't written much or presented anything in ancient, I am feeling insecure about the potential quality of that writing. It's not that I've proven myself unable to -- but I 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
haven't 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
proven myself able to write excellently in that area, given the language and exegesis prerequisite to even getting to the arguments.\'a0\
\
So should I push through this insecurity and see if I can do it or go with what's already working?\'a0\
\
2) Pragmatically, I am highly motivated\'a0to start my dissertation as soon as possible finish it in a strict, timely manner so I can get on the market. If I had to start tomorrow (thank God I don't!) imagining sitting down to write 200 pages on Plato sounds very daunting, given the amount of scholarship I need to become familiar with and the level of language/exegesis required. (I am going to continue with Greek regardless -- it's a lot of fun and very useful). Imagining sitting down to write 200 pages on naturalism in ethics and metaphysics, on the other hand, sounds very motivating. The scholarship I am much more familiar with, a lot of it is Anglo-American, and one could in one sense "get straight to" the arguments.\'a0\
\
Is that kind of pragmatic consideration a worthwhile one or is it always that case that dissertation writing becomes overwhelming at some point or another so the "daunting" factor shouldn't be a factor?\
\
3) Interest wise, I would love teaching ancient or ethics/philosophy of mind at my first job. During the 720 proseminar, you put the AOS in terms of "What would you be comfortable/interest in teaching graduate seminars on for the next 10 years, as well as writing/publishing etc.?" Well, on that front naturalism is a hot topic for me, and has additional draw of that urgent feel of spiritual warfare. We need more folks out there who understand and can offer sustained critiques of the dominant orthodoxy. Plato and Aristotle, on the other hand, will always fascinate me and I hope one day to teach at a liberal arts or great books school such that I can teach them no matter what my specialty is. So on this front either it is a draw, or the naturalism side pulls me a tiny bit more.\'a0\
\
Should I spend more time reflecting on this consideration or is either research area going to inevitably be interesting and become boring/aggravating (especially during the writing phase) before it becomes interesting again?\'a0\
\
4) Jobs wise, it seems that the market has more ethics and metaphysics or phil. mind openings than it does ancient openings. That could change in 3 years, of course.\'a0\
\
But right now, in the interest of making myself desirable on the market, is one or the other research area advisable? Should I even be worrying about that?\'a0\
\
5) Finally, regarding my committee... I applied to UK out of a desire to work with the author of Aristotle: East and West. I was and am inexpressibly grateful that the program accepted me and that you have extended such a hand of friendship and guidance. Hence the thought of having a different advisor than Dr. Bradshaw seems to me quite a crazy one. If I did choose a research topic outside of ancient I feel as if I'd be missing out on studying with you, which weighs heavily against it.\'a0\
\
\
There may of course be a simple solution to this dilemma. Perhaps there is a topic within naturalism somewhere on which you would feel comfortable being my advisor.\'a0\
\
Or perhaps I could do ancient but focus on Platonic (and Aristotelian) ethics, for instance, or Platonic philosophy of mind. That would open up a possible chapter devoted to discussing contemporary applications (perhaps titled "Rampant Platonism: A Defense" in honor of John McDowell?), but would keep the bulk of the research/writing in Plato.\'a0\
\
But I'm not sure.\'a0\
\
That's my dilemma as of now, in writing. I'd love to sit down over coffee if that's the best way. Feel free to respond in writing if you prefer. I know it's a busy time.\'a0\
\
Thank you, and happy first full week of the semester\
}