{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 The last chapter argued that it is possible to express scientific knowledge of natural facts about organisms, such as facts about their life form and function, in generic propositions. (This was our minimal scientific realism.) This chapter addresses the status of humanity. I shall argue that humans are natural organisms. If humans are a species of natural organism, then they inherit the properties belonging to the genus. Hence, it is possible to express scientific knowledge of human organisms, including facts about our life form and functions, in generic propositions. \
\
The generic proposition I shall defend is a particular conception of the differentiam of our species. In the old classificatory schemes, philosophers provided a genus and a differentiam. As Hans Fink explains: "The nature of x is both what is special about this x and what makes this x one of the x\'92s as opposed to the y\'92s. When x is defined per genus et differentiam both the genus and the differentiating characteristic and their combination could be taken to express what is the nature of x.... Human nature is what differentiates us from the animals and the plants."[@fink 207] Specifically, the argument of this chapter is that the best way of characterizing the human life form is in a (somewhat modified) version of a traditional formula: a human being is potentially a  practical, rational animal. Fink continues: "By nature we are rational beings. Our human nature, however, is also that in virtue of which we belong to the animal kingdom and to the living organisms. By nature we are mammals. We may thus use the concept of nature to differentiate rather than include, but also to include rather than differentiate. And we may use the concept of nature to express that differentiation and inclusion should not be seen as incompatible."[@fink 207] The  generic proposition that humans are practical rational animals, I argue, captures the facts of our life form and can be demonstrated to be true from within the human point of view, and from outside it; an alien anthropologist studying human beings from its own non-human point of view could discover that humans are practical rational primates. What follows *ethically* from this is that the virtues are the qualities belonging to creatures like us. Virtues are the human specific goods-of-a-kind. Relatedly, the acquisition of virtues both causes and constitutes the actualization of our life form as practical rational animals. Truly exemplifying our life form constitutes our species-specific flourishing. \
\
In brief, the argument is: \
(1) All natural organisms exhibit formal and functional (i.e., teleological) facts which are expressible in generics. \
(2) Human beings are natural organisms.\
(3) Human beings exhibit formal and teleological facts which are expressible in generics. \
(4) Human beings are practical, rational animals. \
(5) Humans are to become practical, rational animals. \
(6) The qualities human being acquire on the way to becoming fully practical, rational animals are virtues. \
\
We already argued for (1). Let's start by supporting (2). Are human beings natural organisms? On the face of it, such an assertion would seem to be trivially true. Humans are animals \'97 primates of the chordata phylum \'97 who like every other organism live on the earth, enjoy a particular evolutionary history, and engage in activities such as eating, reproducing, sleeping, and moving about on the earth. \
\
Nevertheless, as phrased, the second premise is ambiguous. Some readers might want to disambiguate it. Two possible responses deserve mention. The first sort of reader might want to be clear that by asserting that human beings are natural organisms, they intend to assert that human beings are *merely* natural. They intend, in other words, to smuggle in a crassly reductionistic conception of 'human animal' under the guise of an innocent truism. On this conception, humans are machines made of meat just the same way that all of nature is a machine and all animals are machines. Although human beings seem unique among the animal kingdom, this response glosses over the apparent uniqueness in the name of battling human exceptionalism.  \
\
A second way of clarifying the premise that 'human beings are natural organisms' is that human beings are exceptional, especially in being rational animals. This second sort of reader might want to be clear that human beings are unique among natural organisms. They intend to smuggle in a dualistic or supernaturalistic conception of 'human being'. On this conception, human beings are ghosts in machines, or made in the image of God, or (in an unforgettable phrase from novelist Walker Percy "angelic beasts" or "bestial angels"). \
\
Between these two ways of disambiguating the premise that human beings are natural organisms, I prefer not to disambiguate it. The first reason is that discussing such matters would take us into deep metaphysical waters, while our main goal is to identify, as far as we can, what exactly characterizes our life form only in order to explore whether this examination bears any relevance to the ethics of virtue and vice. A second reason is that such calculated indeterminacy, I hope, will allow for both kinds of readers to participate in the dialectic regardless of their metaphysical commitments.\
 \
Humans are natural organisms. According to the arguments above, all of organic nature is subject to evaluation according to patterns of natural normativity. Recall Hursthouse's statement that ethical evaluations of *human beings* "depend upon our identifying what is characteristic of the species in question."[@hursthouse1998virtue chapter 9 abstract.] The 'characteristic', I take it, is a differentiam determining or defining the human life form, or nature, or archetype. By comparison to this life form, evaluations of individual human beings is possible. To take a small example, we identify speech disorders such as apraxia, muteness, and stuttering by comparison to a conception of what human speech is like. And "what human speech is like" is expressed in a series of generics: human speech consists of such-and-such range of individual sounds, such-and-such variety of pitches and voice, physiological and neurological properties of the tongue and the brain, syntactical and grammatical properties, and so on. So what generics pick out formal and teleological facts about human beings? \
\
One sort of reader might object that such a search is futile. As Stephen Brown says, "Human nature is variability itself."[@brown1999human] Other natural kinds \'97 physical, chemical, organic kinds \'97 exhibit relatively stable features: *All* metal is conductive, and *all* tigers are striped. But there is nothing true of *all* human beings. Any patterns can be subverted. A related point is that even if we found truly universal patterns within humanity, such would be irrelevant to ethics. As rational beings, we can stand back from putatively universal patterns and ask whether we ought to conform to them. In a word, perhaps human rationality frees us from the determinism of our life form. Hursthouse acknowledges this pair of objections: \
\
>\'85 ethical naturalism looks to be doomed to failure if it depends on identifying what is characteristic of human beings as a species, in the way their pleasures and pains and ways of going on are characteristic of the other species. By and large we can't identify what is characteristic of human beings as a species in this way--there is too much variety. And even if we could, it looks as though we would not allow anything we identified to carry any normative weight if we thought it was something we could change. So is ethical naturalism, after all, a non\uc0\u8208 starter?"[@hursthouse1998virtue 222.]\
\
The search for true generics about human beings and the human life form is not futile. While the desired generics cannot *ignore* or *contradict* our status as physical, living, animals, they also cannot be *merely* descriptions of our genes, organ systems, 30 billion brain neurons, and so on. They must also capture what is ethical or potentially ethical about human beings as rational creatures. As an example, "humans are language-using primates" is the kind of generic we must defend as *both* "objective" and scientific *and* practical and ethical. \
\
Offering an argument for the truth of the generic that 'humans are practical, rational animals' and addressing these objections will occupy us for this chapter and beyond. \
\
Our task is to provide a conception of human nature that is both normative and descriptive. We must first uncover, if possible, a set of scientific generics about humanity, specifying what kind of natural creature human beings are and what kind of characteristic life they live -- what kind of life they live "by nature". Such generics, it is hoped, will give us initial insight into the concept and content of virtue, excellence, wisdom, and flourishing, which are our main themes.\
}