{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
\
# Eudaimonia: Virtues as Realizing our Natural Human Telos\
\
**Quotation**. "\uc0\u947 \u941 \u957 \u959 \u953 ' \u959 
\f1 \uc0\u7991 
\f0 \uc0\u959 \u962  
\f1 \uc0\u7952 
\f0 \uc0\u963 \u963 
\f1 \uc0\u8054 
\f0  \uc0\u956 \u945 \u952 \u974 \u957 " ("Become such as you are, having learned what that is") Pindar, *Pythian* 2, line 72. \
\
**Quotation**  *\'93What use would it be if a man had the wisdom of Nestor and wanted the necessaries of life, food and drink and clothes and the like? Where would be the advantage of wisdom then?\'94 Eryxias (attributed to Plato)*\
\
**Quotation**  "Secular morality has lost a sense of the final importance of a good death for salvation. There is no guiding vision of the normatively human." -- Tristram H. Engelhardt, *Foundations of Christian Bioethics*, xii.\
\
**Quotation**  *"The organic body sang together..."* -- Charles Williams, "The Vision of the Empire", *Taliesson Through Logres.* \\\
\
\
## Introduction: Destiny and Destination\
 \
**Thesis:** Virtue partially constitutes human flourishing (the realization of our human telos); there is a human telos, and virtue partially constitutes it. It *only partially* constitutes it.\
\
\
**Summary: Virtues as partly constituting the realization of our natural human telos.** This chapter presents an account of human teleology as partly achievable through the virtues. I distinguish various senses of telos and consider several potential specifications of this indeterminate concept. There is traditionally some link between virtues and the human telos whether eudaimonia, flourishing, thriving, welfare, etc.[@brown2008virtue is not a eudaimonist, but alleges that virtues do contribute to the realization of the human telos of reproduction.] Bentham and Nietzsche, among others, mock this alleged role.[Cf. @annas2011intelligent] The questions I am to answer are: What is our telos and how do virtues relate to it?[@annas1993morality; @adams2006theory chapter 4; @mcdowell1980role] If virtues to bring about happiness, again, is that just egoism?[@huang2010self] Is there even a telos for humanity, or is there no sense in speaking of a *human function*?[@murdoch1998sovereignty; @brown2008virtue chapter 2; @macintyre1984after, chapter 5] How relevant to ethics is human "metaphysical biology\'94?[@brown2008virtue chapter 3 and 4; @mcdowell1998two] Is ethics partly dependent on our animal nature[@macintyre1999dependent; @bailey2015animalism; @barham2011] or solely on our rationality?[@mcdowell1996mind; @foot2001natural] Are virtues necessary for true or "deep happiness"[@foot2001natural chapter 6] or are they necessary and sufficient?[@annas2005naturalism] Is it possible to be virtuous and miserable?  What is misery? Can we know happiness without knowing whether or not there is an after life? Virtue partly constitutes human flourishing but does not completely constitute it, because luck and fortune out of our control have a real impact on our happiness and our objective flourishing.\
\
\
### A Dim Future\
\
Suppose the year is 8,000 AD, and a lone spaceship is hovering over the planet formerly known as earth. All the greenery hewn away by human industry has regrown, and the impossibly high towers have toppled. Whether the climate changed beyond the tipping point, or nuclear war made farming impossible, or disease ravaged the race -- no living humans remain on earth. Perhaps they voluntarily gave themselves up for extinction, preferring to end their millenia-long reign as the king of the food chain. \
\
Would it have been worthwhile? Is it better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all? These questions are not science fiction, but have a pressing hypothetical import. For they impact our reasons for being moral *now*. \
\
Geach says that we do not need to know our natural teleology in detail in order to pursue it. Perhaps well-begun is half done. \
\
### The problems addressed in this chapter\
\
The theme if our present chapter is to puzzle through some  of the most difficult ethical questions.\
\
1. Why be good? If the conclusions from the previous inquiry were on the mark, then we can rephrase this question without a change of meaning: why is virtue (especially practical wisdom) necessary for human flourishing? This is the same question, since, \'93virtue\'94 (especially practical wisdom) is what *good* is for creatures like us; and \'93human flourishing\'94 is  a name for, ex hypothesis, that indeterminate concept of the one thing worth pursuing. The question \'93why be good?\'94 or \'93why be virtuous?\'94 should not be taken as the irrational question in the vicinity: \'93why do anything at all? Why be motivate?\'94 Such a question is practical irrationality unadulterated, as we saw with Melville\'92s Bartleby. The preference not to do anything \'97 or the lack of preference to do anything \'97 is inhuman \'93madness\'94 or mental illness. \
\
>Now this can easily be made to seem a strange worry. The thought that virtue is sufficient for happiness or flourishing is apt to produce Aristotle\'92s response: you can\'92t be serious. But if you accept that a flourishing life isn\'92t just one in which you have lots of stuff, or one in which you get success by any means \'96 if, that is, you accept that wicked or selfish people do not in fact flourish, so that only those who live virtuously have a chance of flourishing \'96 then a problem does emerge as to why virtue is not sufficient for flourishing. For it is up to me whether I live virtuously, or at least try to, but Aristotelian theories accept that even if I do the best I can I may still be deprived of happiness by factors that are beyond my control. For Aristotle, happiness is a hybrid combination of living virtuously and of achieving a measure of success in worldly terms. The latter is not under my control, and cannot be guaranteed.[Annas, "Virtue Ethics: What Kind of Naturalism?" in @gardiner2005virtue]\
\
2. Is realizing our telos a human goal or somehow supernatural? Surely teleology is not natural after all, but only psychological, intentional? \
\
3. By my definition of virtue, it is virtuous to pursue happiness -- but is it *morally good* to pursue happiness? The worry here arise from the fact that, as we draw closer to the concept of telos (from human nature to virtue or human excellence, and from virtue to practical wisdom) the stakes are raised. If one gets one's virtue concepts wrong, it may plausibly have a negative impact on one's life. If one get's one's concept of practical rationality itself wrong, one may have many virtues but still, sadly, end up a fool. If one gets one's concept of happiness wrong, however, and *actually achieves that happiness* this would be even worse than being a fool. One would, after long years, and perhaps decades of effort, achieve one's goal, only to find that the goal is somehow flawed. One would be pursuing happiness all along and achieve only objective misery. This is even worse than being a fool, I say, since it might conceivably be possible that one could be a fool -- practically irrational in many respects -- who still by some confluence of lucky factors or benevolent friends, ends up enjoying well-being in some respects. But by definition one cannot be objectively happy and objectively miserable. This reflection upon the "raising stakes" makes sense of the importance of this chapter. \
4. Objective List Theory of Well-being. We might *know* a series of good things as good for us, without knowing *why* they are so good (without reflection). We might even mistake what is good, and mistake why it is good or not.[@hooker1996does]\
\
## Introduction 2\
\
\
## Objections and Details Part II: Telos\
\
My aim is to discuss a bit more about the details of the human telos. I shall assume that Aristotle and Annas are right that happiness is a good enough name for that thing or set of things, whatever it is/they are, that constitute our telos. So this is a discussion of happiness.\
\
### Is there telos like happiness for humanity? Destiny and destination\
\
I would like to begin a discussion of happiness by distinguishing between two concepts: destiny and destination. \
\
Roughly, a destiny is an inevitable end. A destination is an *avoidable* end; it is a *chosen* end. Destiny does not contain within it (at least not necessarily) any intentionality. An asteroid many light years away from the moon (let's say) has a destiny of hitting the moon in 180,000 years. It's trajectory, and the coincidental perfect timing of the absence of any intervening objects, makes contact inevitable. \
\
A destination is different. When I told my mother I was moving to Kentucky *to get a PhD in philosophy* I was not describing my inevitable destiny, but describing my chosen destination. Many intervening factors could prevent me (car trouble, illness, etc.) -- and what's more, many factors could *dissuade me* (lack of jobs, money trouble, etc.). \
\
Happiness is our human destination. It is not, sadly, our human destiny. \
\
There is no one factor that seems to capture our destiny except biological death. The major candidates for a hoped-for destiny are not universal: Health, reproduction, and survival. Not all living things are healthy, not all successfully reproduce, and in the end none survive. \
\
But is there a universal human destination? If so, is it merely biological or something more -- perhaps neurophysiological, psychological, or spiritual?\
\
All living things *strive* for health, survival, reproduction and genetic propagation. But all living things, in the end, die. Individuals die when their metabolism stops, when if they have brains all brain functions stop, when they stop moving, and so on. Species "die" when they go extinct. \
\
Socrates is mortal. All men are mortal, and Socrates is man. But so are you and I "men" (the species, not the sex). So our destiny is biological death. \
\
What is our destination? Survival? The avoidance of death? Eternal life? Salvation? Evolution? Pleasure? "Permanent human happiness?"^[The Dalai Lama proposed this formulation.] Peace and nonviolence? Knowledge? The vision of God? Freedom from the wheel of reincarnation? Each of these guesses has something to commend it. \
\
1. The avoidance of death by medical science and/or evolution. This is the transhumanist project of Ray Kurzweil, Google's Calico, and Nick Bostrom. \
2. The avoidance of death by salvation from God as a free gift, or through faith or holiness or both. This is the Christian vision of \
3. The achievement of pleasure while life lasts. This is formalized despair. There is no happiness, therefore eat drink and be "happy" with scare quotes in bold. Our destiny is all we have, so we have no destination. Enjoy the journey until the journey dumps you into the trash compactor. \
4. The vision of God. This is the peculiarly Christian vision. \
5. Freedom from the wheel of reincarnation. \
\
One major distinction can be drawn between these various views along the question of how long human life lasts. Is human life (ideally) about 80 years, or more as medical science advances? Or is the human life countless millennia? This is a factual question that, of course, bears on the question of our telos. \
\
Is there any one conception of happiness that can coordinate these two views? If not, then no discussion of happiness can proceed before either proving or assuming an answer about the length of human life. \
\
Clearly, proving an answer to the satisfaction of all is a fool's errand. It is a  massive, contentious question. One can formulate it in terms of human personhood, the "immortality of the soul," and so on. Andrew Bailey's recent paper calls this the "persistence question": Do human animals have strictly biological persistence conditions?\
\
> Most contemporary animalists also say \'91yes\'92 to the persistence question. According to these animalists, a human animal lasts across an interval just in the case that its \'91purely animal functions \'96 metabolism, the capacity to breathe and circulate one\'92s blood, and the like \'96 continue' across that interval. We may, following Eric Olson, call this theory about the persistence of animals the \'91Biological Approach\'92.\
\
If so, what criteria would such a view have to satisfy? \
\
Given that human beings are rational animals that live either approximately 80 years or forever, what is our destination? The disjunction embedded in the question opens up a discouragingly wide range of possible answers. Nevertheless, let us try to answer it \
\
If there is any *one* thing that animals seek, it is determined by their nature. In my terms, their nature provides a "destiny". But our rational nature makes our way of life variable and hence pluralizes our destiny until death consolidates all those differences again. Hence if there is any *one* thing that rational animals seek, it is determined by the nature of rationality itself. Clearly, different people and cultures vary in believing and valuing particular objects. But variance is compatible with a single telos or single *plurality* of teloi. \
\
Variance is compatible with error. \
\
Is there anything rationality seeks by nature? Knowledge. What about practical rationality? Goodness. That is, knowing things *is what reason does*, and pursuing good things *is what practical reason does*; reason also avoid false things, and practical reason avoids evil. \
\
Happiness, the destination of every human being, is to know truth and to attain as much goodness as possible -- whether in the span of 80-90 years (barring illness, injury, and ) until biological death or for the rest of time. \
\
That this is our telos is possible to know even without knowing whether, in fact, our existence persists beyond biological death. \
\
According to Sartre, we must despair. According to Russel we must despair. According to these two, despair is the rational emotion, the emotion that makes most sense given the facts; the emotion that \'93fits\'94 reality. \
\
I think despair is a rational emotion if we are animals who amass goods for 80 years or so and then die, and if our species will eventually go extinct and all habitable planets in the cosmos will become uninhabitable. However, like Russel, the pursuit of knowledge is still worthwhile. It is our human \'93ideals of goodness and knowledge\'94 (I paraphrase Russel) that remain worthwhile pursuits even under the shadow of despair cast by that great reality of death. \
\
### Russell on Doom\
\
### Objection: We don't know our nature\
\
Someone might respond to the question of what is human nature by saying:  we don\'92t know. For all we can tell (without the benefit of divine revelation) humanity is an anomaly. Our origin is shrouded in mystery, our destiny undecided. \
\
Above, I mentioned the worry that human nature is a fundamental mystery. \
\
We do not know our origins or destiny. As far as we know, without the benefit of divine revelation, is the story we are told in biology and anthropology textbooks: 200,000 years ago, hominids somehow developed new cognitive abilities sufficient to justify calling one or a set of these creatures \'93the first humans.\'94 Our earliest direct, archaeological evidence of our ancestors is that they were artists: paintings adorn the caves of France. \
\
The evidence of recorded histories from Babylon, China, and Egypt tell a story of humanity already busied with architecture, science, imperial politics, and bustling with trade, culture, language, and art. The student of human nature ought to be a historian. To pursue my theme, we must move on. \
\
If our deep origins are shrouded in mystery, our future destiny is relatively clear. By any account, our species is doomed.  The science fiction dream of off-world colonies is most likely just a dream: no livable other planet has been discovered within our solar system or any of the surrounding regions. Even if one were discovered further out, along concentric circles each light years in diameter, the practical limitations on space travel for large numbers across unimaginable distances render off-world colonization virtually impossible. The only possibility left, itself highly impracticable, seems to me that scientific technology advances to a point that we can conceivably *create* an atmosphere on a planet that does not currently have one. \
\
Regardless of these dreams, if our current planet does not go into an ice age, or a dust bowl, or become a nuclear wasteland, or if a volcanic canopy does not eliminate conditions for organic life, then *eventually* the running down of our sun will condemn our species to the same fate of 99% of all species that have existed up until now: extinction.\
\
Bertrand Russell's famous essay "Free Man's Worship" poetically describes the cold, hard, reality of the natural destiny of the human species: \
\
>That Man is the product of causes which had no prevision of the end they were achieving; that his origin, his growth, his hopes and fears, his loves and his beliefs, are but the outcome of accidental collocations of atoms; that no fire, no heroism, no intensity of thought and feeling, can preserve an individual life beyond the grave; that all the labours of the ages, all the devotion, all the inspiration, all the noonday brightness of human genius, are destined to extinction in the vast death of the solar system, and that the whole temple of Man's achievement must inevitably be buried beneath the debris of a universe in ruins--all these things, if not quite beyond dispute, are yet so nearly certain, that no philosophy which rejects them can hope to stand. Only within the scaffolding of these truths, only on the firm foundation of unyielding despair, can the soul's habitation henceforth be safely built.\
\
Russell sees two possible structure that can be built on the "firm foundation of unyielding despair." The first is to worship power (which is the choice of slaves) and the second is, even in the face of death and annihilation, to worship ideals of truth and goodness (which is the choice of the free). The freedom and nobility of humanity lies in our cognition, even our recognition that we are slaves. He continues:\
\
>The life of Man, viewed outwardly, is but a small thing in comparison with the forces of Nature. The slave is doomed to worship Time and Fate and Death, because they are greater than anything he finds in himself, and because all his thoughts are of things which they devour. But, great as they are, to think of them greatly, to feel their passionless splendour, is greater still. And such thought makes us free men... To abandon the struggle for private happiness, to expel all eagerness of temporary desire, to burn with passion for eternal things--this is emancipation, and this is the free man's worship.\
\
Russell points to the noble impulse to cultivate our rational capacities in the light of our impending doom. \
\
## Neo-Aristotelians on Eudaimonia\
\
### Foot on Deep Happiness\
\
Foot argues that happiness is \'93deep satisfaction.\'94 This is compatible with, say, an extremely uncomfortable and even tragic life, like Wittgenstein\'92s. It is not compatible with superficial satisfaction, the froth of pleasure and tittering mirth that floats on a shallow waters. It must be \'93deep\'94, by which I suppose she means that it stands up to our own reflections in a sober hour. \
\
\
### Hursthouse\
\
>But what could this fifth end be? Tradition offers us a few alternatives. We might say that the fifth end was the preparation of our souls for the life hereafter, or that it was contemplation\'97the good functioning of the theoretical intellect. But to adopt the first is to go beyond naturalism towards supernaturalism, and even philosophers have baulked at following Aristotle and endorsing the second. I am not in a position to assert that there is no fifth end peculiarly appropriate to our rationality, but no plausible candidate suggests itself and I will suggest instead that the genuinely transforming effect of our rationality on the basic structure adequately registers the \'91huge gap\'92 that exists between us and the other animals.[@hursthouse1998virtue 218]\
\
### McDowell on Eudaimonia as the Noblest Life\
\
McDowell takes the old Stoic line that virtues just *are* eudaimonia. There is nothing more \'93external\'94 to it, certainly nothing external. \
\
Eudaimonia is a finite good, it is not simply "well-being". It is the highest kind of well-being, a noble kind. \
\
\
### MacIntyre on Telos as becoming independent practical reasoners\
\
\
### *After Virtue*\
\
MacIntyre is retiring and coy about what he thinks our telos might be. All he will say is the minimal definition: we ought to be free to pursue our telos. Virtue enables this. What more our telos might consist in I do not know that he cares to speculate. \
\
### *Dependent Rational Animals*\
\
*Dependent Rational Animals* is a more ambitious book in some respects. MacIntyre aims to build a broader account of virtues by attending to not only our independence but our dependence. Much of our dependence on each other stems from our animality: periods of gestation, infancy, old age, and illness all make us dependent on our fellow creatures. \
\
\
\
>Happiness\'94 in this sense concerns what benefits a person, is good for her, makes her better off, serves her interests, or is desirable for her for her sake. To be high in well-being is to be faring well, doing well, fortunate, or in an enviable condition. Ill-being, or doing badly, may call for sympathy or pity, whereas we envy or rejoice in the good fortune of others, and feel gratitude for our own. Being good for someone differs from simply being good, period: perhaps it is always good, period, for you to be honest; yet it may not always be good for you, as when it entails self-sacrifice. Not coincidentally, the word \'91happiness\'92 derives from the term for good fortune, or \'93good hap,\'94 and indeed the terms used to translate it in other languages have similar roots. In this sense of the term\'97call it the \'93well-being sense\'94\'97happiness refers to a life of well-being or flourishing: a life that goes well for you.[@sephappiness]\
\
\
MacIntyre's provisional conception of our human telos is this:  \'93The good life for man is the life spent in seeking for the good life for man, and the virtues necessary for the seeking are those which will enable us to understand what more and what else the good life for man is."[@macintyre1984after 210] Our telos is to be free to pursue our telos. MacIntyre is not a straightforward eudaemonist; this conception of the human telos is more vague than Aristotle's. Whatever the human telos turns out to be, it minimally includes the freedom to explore "what else" the telos might be. \
\
\
## Discussion: Our Natural Telos\
\
\
\
## Objections and Details Part II: Telos\
\
My aim is to discuss a bit more about the details of the human telos. I shall assume that Aristotle and Annas are right that happiness is a good enough name for that thing or set of things, whatever it is/they are, that constitute our telos. So this is a discussion of happiness.\
\
### Is there telos like happiness for humanity? Destiny and destination\
\
I would like to begin a discussion of happiness by distinguishing between two concepts: destiny and destination. \
\
Roughly, a destiny is an inevitable end. A destination is an *avoidable* end; it is a *chosen* end. Destiny does not contain within it (at least not necessarily) any intentionality. An asteroid many light years away from the moon (let's say) has a destiny of hitting the moon in 180,000 years. It's trajectory, and the coincidental perfect timing of the absence of any intervening objects, makes contact inevitable. \
\
A destination is different. When I told my mother I was moving to Kentucky *to get a PhD in philosophy* I was not describing my inevitable destiny, but describing my chosen destination. Many intervening factors could prevent me (car trouble, illness, etc.) -- and what's more, many factors could *dissuade me* (lack of jobs, money trouble, etc.). \
\
Happiness is our human destination. It is not, sadly, our human destiny. \
\
There is no one factor that seems to capture our destiny except biological death. The major candidates for a hoped-for destiny are not universal: Health, reproduction, and survival. Not all living things are healthy, not all successfully reproduce, and in the end none survive. \
\
But is there a universal human destination? If so, is it merely biological or something more -- perhaps neurophysiological, psychological, or spiritual?\
\
All living things *strive* for health, survival, reproduction and genetic propagation. But all living things, in the end, die. Individuals die when their metabolism stops, when if they have brains all brain functions stop, when they stop moving, and so on. Species "die" when they go extinct. \
\
Socrates is mortal. All men are mortal, and Socrates is man. But so are you and I "men" (the species, not the sex). So our destiny is biological death. \
\
What is our destination? Survival? The avoidance of death? Eternal life? Salvation? Evolution? Pleasure? "Permanent human happiness?"^[The Dalai Lama proposed this formulation.] Peace and nonviolence? Knowledge? The vision of God? Freedom from the wheel of reincarnation? Each of these guesses has something to commend it. \
\
1. The avoidance of death by medical science and/or evolution. This is the transhumanist project of Ray Kurzweil, Google's Calico, and Nick Bostrom. \
2. The avoidance of death by salvation from God as a free gift, or through faith or holiness or both. This is the Christian vision of \
3. The achievement of pleasure while life lasts. This is formalized despair. There is no happiness, therefore eat drink and be "happy" with scare quotes in bold. Our destiny is all we have, so we have no destination. Enjoy the journey until the journey dumps you into the trash compactor. \
4. The vision of God. This is the peculiarly Christian vision. \
5. Freedom from the wheel of reincarnation. \
\
One major distinction can be drawn between these various views along the question of how long human life lasts. Is human life (ideally) about 80 years, or more as medical science advances? Or is the human life countless millennia? This is a factual question that, of course, bears on the question of our telos. \
\
Is there any one conception of happiness that can coordinate these two views? If not, then no discussion of happiness can proceed before either proving or assuming an answer about the length of human life. \
\
Clearly, proving an answer to the satisfaction of all is a fool's errand. It is a  massive, contentious question. One can formulate it in terms of human personhood, the "immortality of the soul," and so on. Andrew Bailey's recent paper calls this the "persistence question": Do human animals have strictly biological persistence conditions?\
\
> Most contemporary animalists also say \'91yes\'92 to the persistence question. According to these animalists, a human animal lasts across an interval just in the case that its \'91purely animal functions \'96 metabolism, the capacity to breathe and circulate one\'92s blood, and the like \'96 continue' across that interval. We may, following Eric Olson, call this theory about the persistence of animals the \'91Biological Approach\'92.\
\
If so, what criteria would such a view have to satisfy? \
\
Given that human beings are rational animals that live either approximately 80 years or forever, what is our destination? The disjunction embedded in the question opens up a discouragingly wide range of possible answers. Nevertheless, let us try to answer it \
\
If there is any *one* thing that animals seek, it is determined by their nature. In my terms, their nature provides a "destiny". But our rational nature makes our way of life variable and hence pluralizes our destiny until death consolidates all those differences again. Hence if there is any *one* thing that rational animals seek, it is determined by the nature of rationality itself. Clearly, different people and cultures vary in believing and valuing particular objects. But variance is compatible with a single telos or single *plurality* of teloi. \
\
Variance is compatible with error. \
\
Is there anything rationality seeks by nature? Knowledge. What about practical rationality? Goodness. That is, knowing things *is what reason does*, and pursuing good things *is what practical reason does*; reason also avoid false things, and practical reason avoids evil. \
\
Happiness, the destination of every human being, is to know truth and to attain as much goodness as possible -- whether in the span of 80-90 years (barring illness, injury, and ) until biological death or for the rest of time. \
\
That this is our telos is possible to know even without knowing whether, in fact, our existence persists beyond biological death. \
\
According to Sartre, we must despair. According to Russel we must despair. According to these two, despair is the rational emotion, the emotion that makes most sense given the facts; the emotion that \'93fits\'94 reality. \
\
I think despair is a rational emotion if we are animals who amass goods for 80 years or so and then die, and if our species will eventually go extinct and all habitable planets in the cosmos will become uninhabitable. However, like Russel, the pursuit of knowledge is still worthwhile. It is our human \'93ideals of goodness and knowledge\'94 (I paraphrase Russel) that remain worthwhile pursuits even under the shadow of despair cast by that great reality of death. \
\
\
### My view Synthesize, Compare\
\
### Some points\
\
Flourishing-- minimally, social and individual learning, knowledge, pleasure, survival, pleasure, and maximally eternal life and glory. It is not intolerant\
\
Teleology-- our natural end is flourishing. It is not supernatural. It is not merely animal. It is second natural. \
\
### The importance of telos\
\
That teleology is important has been one of the central contentions of this dissertation. \
\
\
\
\
### Three characters, one successful, one virtuous, one both successful and virtuous\
\
The first character I should like to keep before our imagination is the Successful Man: wealthy, powerful, influential, well-connected, owning lots of land, designer clothes, and jets. This is Bruce Wayne, Donald Trump, or Hilary Clinton. We can playfully imagine them furthermore in the peak of life in beauty, health, and vigor. Whether or not this person is virtuous seems to be beside the point: they are Successful. They may not be wise but they enjoy the richness of the \'93aesthetic life.\'94\
\
The second character is the Scrappy Sage: even though these wise, unyielding in principle, scrupulous, discerning, practical, reliable,  beneficent, large-minded, generous, unflappable, just, undeceived and undeceivable, undistracted by petty pleasures, and far-sighted regarding the affairs of this life. This is Diogenes, Symeon Stylites, or John the Baptist who were despised for their lack of Success but admired and sought out for their Sagacity. They are ascetic sages but rejecting the aesthetic and embracing the \'93ethical life.\'94 \
\
The third is a combination of worldly success and virtuous sagacity: wealthy but wise, powerful but unyielding in principle, influential but scrupulous, well-connected by discerning, full of possessions but practical. This is King Solomon, Cato the Younger, or St. Katherine of Sienna. \
\
The question \'91why be good?\'92 is asked by someone who is earnestly in doubt as to whether it is better to be more like Solomon or St. Katherine than like Donald Trump or Hilary Clinton. They might agree that virtue and success together are better than virtue and no success; they are earnestly in doubt as to whether it would be better to have success without virtue or virtue without success. So the question \'93why be good?\'94 is not the question \'93Why be motivated at all?\'94 but \'93why not be motivated, after all, by success with or without virtue?\'92. \
\
This question is echoed by Eryxias: even supposing someone were as wise as Nestor, wouldn\'92t such a person be miserable without food and drink and clothes and the like? What *advantage* is wisdom? The assumption here is that the meaning of  \'93advantage\'94 is advantage for *us* here and now, not just abstract admirable qualities. \
\
If virtues is partly constitutive of flourishing (even \'93success\'94), then the question \'91why be virtuous?\'92 is close \'97 if not identical \'97 to the irrational question \'91why do what is worth doing?\'92. It is a conceptual confusion. However, if virtue is not constitutive of flourishing, then the question of whether *I* really ought to let virtue be the over overriding practical consideration instead of the alluring temptations of wealth, riches, sex, and power in however great of quantities I can achieve. \
\
So my first thesis in this chapter, is this: virtue causes human flourishing but also partly constitutes it. This is my first step toward solving the problem of why be good. \
\
Many neo-Aristotelians use \'93flourishing\'94 to translate the untranslatable \'93eudaimonia.\'94 \
\
Eudaimonia is the human telos. telos is, of course, Greek for "end". The word is bursting with dizzying array of possible meanings, including "definite point", "goal", "purpose," "cessation," "order," "prize," "highest point", "realization", "decision", and "services."[@liddell1896intermediate compare with Strong's 5056: "telos tel'-os from a primary *tello* (to set out for a definite point or goal); properly, the point aimed at as a limit, i.e. (by implication) the conclusion of an act or state (termination (literally, figuratively or indefinitely), result (immediate, ultimate or prophetic), purpose); specially, an impost or levy (as paid); continual, custom, end(-ing), finally, uttermost."] There are at least two kinds of teleology we can distinguish between: natural and social.[@barham2011] Natural teleology is not *intentional*. Social teleology is. The type of teleology the Aristotelian tradition takes for granted is natural teleology, of which social teleology is an instance in human rational creatures. \
\
So our telos is eudaimonia. What is eudaimonia? Answering this question is treacherously difficult. \'93Religious\'94 pagans like Aristotle thought it was the intellectual life of an (Athenian) gentlemen. Christians like Aquinas think it is the beatific vision of God after this life is over, including the time after a bodily resurrection. Atheists and other noble secularists such as Russell and Murdoch think that eudaimonia is a particular kind of virtuous and wise life here and now, despite the coming darkness. (Less noble secularists opt for cocaine, sex, whisky, heroine.) These are different reactions, but both are reactions to formalized despair. On a happier note, or perhaps equally anxious note, Ray Kurzweil and other transhumanists think that even this life can be extended, perhaps a little, perhaps a lot, which would afford more time to explore just what eudaimonia might be. I do not here bother to mention theories of reincarnation Is there any way to coordinate these views? \
\
Virtues play some important part in happiness, unless the immoralist consents to the despairing notion that if death ends all, then life is meaningless and so eat drink and be merry. \
\
The old Stoic line was the noble belief that virtue is *all* of eudaimonia. There is nothing more to be desired but virtue; \'93virtue is it\'92s own reward.\'94 The Aristotelian line was, not surprisingly, a bit more human. The life of virtuous activity is necessary but not sufficient for eudaimonia. Also needed are money, friends, and some good fortune. In a sense, the fully virtuous man or woman could be a victim to the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune and lose all. But this is just a way of saying that tragedies can indeed happen. Socrates would, with superhuman stubbornness, deny it. *Nothing* can harm the good man; and nothing save the bad one.\
\
### Minimal and Maximal Conceptions\
\
I would also like to distinguish between minimal conceptions and maximal conceptions of happiness. A minimal conception includes a necessary condition or set of necessary conditions the absence of which plausible constitutes *misery*. Peter Geach alludes to this kind of conception when he argues that only a broad basis of ethical agreement is needed for two groups to work together on building a hospital or running a university.[@geach1977virtues] Alasdair MacIntyre\'92s conception of telos in *After Virtue* is what I have called \'93minimal\'94. A maximal conception of happiness is more imaginative, certainly, but more divisive. A maximal conception imagines what state of affairs or what human activity constitutes *full and completely satisfying human life* \'97 fulfillment to the highest imaginable degree. Boethius pretty clearly aims for this kind of conception when he argues that the good of man is complete self-sufficiency and hence cannot but any \'93false happiness\'94 such as wealth, power, or pleasure but must be participation in God himself.^[*Consolation of Philosophy*, Book III.] \
\
Natural law theorists like to talk about \'91perfections\'92 of nature, and happiness as \'91perfect\'92 or complete. I prefer the term \'91maximal\'92 to \'91perfective\'92 for two reasons. First, the concept of maximum is relative to circumstances; one should aim to be as happy as possible *given the limitations of time*. This clause includes theist and atheists in the conversation since they may disagree on just what the limitations of time are but agree that we should aim to be as happy as possible. Secondly, the notion of perfection implies that human nature has natural limits of happiness, a terminus. I\'92m not sure this is true. It might be that, so long as one lives well, and so long as the average lifespan of western industrial peoples continues to increase. Is there a natural limit, for instance, to how many languages one can learn? I know three languages. With enough time before my biological end, couldn\'92t I learn ten? Someone more gifted with languages already knows ten and could learn twenty. If they lived 200 years, couldn\'92t they learn thirty languages? Is there a natural limit to wisdom? Can one become fully wise and then stop? Continuing the discussion using the notion of relative maximum keeps the case open on this issue. \
\
// % \
>\'93What is the relation of the list theory to perfectionism? Perfectionism is a sub\uc0\u8208 species of the list theory. Perfectionism differs from other kinds of list theory in claiming that we ascertain what gets on the list by considering essential, distinctive, or characteristic human capacities or activities. That is, other kinds of list theory would reject the idea that your having or exercising X constitutes a benefit to you if and only if X is an essential, distinctive, or characteristic human capacity or activity.\'94 [@hooker1996does 145-6]\
>One premiss of this argument is that the most plausible versions of the list theory will have achievement on the list. The other premiss is that living a truly moral life is an achievement. From these premisses it follows that moral virtue gets on the list because being morally virtuous is a kind of achievement. Call this the argument from achievement.16\
\
\
\
### Evolution and Telos \
\
\
>For these reasons, a welfare-based conception of natural functions and ends is problematic. Suppose, as suggested above, that an organism's teleological profile is indeed shaped by the facts of the evolutionary history that ultimately explain how it was put together as the organized functional system it is. In that case, organisms will be teleologically organized ultimately and generally toward the end (roughly) of passing along germ-line copies of their genes as well as or better than rival conspecifics (this being the unifying effect non-incidentally promoted by all of the organism's proper-functional traits)\'97rather than toward the end of flourishing as such in any richer, intuitive sense. Since this has little to do with what we would think of as ultimately and generally relevant to ethical normativity when applied to the human case, it seems doubtful that the normative framework provided by natural teleology can be of any help in thinking about the normative framework of ethics (FitzPatrick 2000; on the other side, see Casebeer 2003 for a defense of such an approach, and Lott 2012 for a defense of Foot and Thomson against FitzPatrick's objections).\
\
\
>Again, of all the things that come to us by nature we first acquire the potentiality and later exhibit the activity (this is plain in the case of the senses; for it was not by often seeing or often hearing that we got these senses, but on the contrary we had them before we used them, and did not come to have them by using them); but the virtues we get by first exercising them, as also happens in the case of the arts as well. For the things we have to learn before we can do them, we learn by doing them, e.g. men become builders by building and lyreplayers by playing the lyre; so too we become just by doing just acts, temperate by doing temperate acts, brave by doing brave acts.[@aristotle *Nic. Ethics* Book II.1]\
\
\
#Appendix: Natural Teleology Revisited\
\
## Objections and Details Part II: Telos\
\
My aim is to discuss a bit more about the details of the human telos. I shall assume that Aristotle and Annas are right that happiness is a good enough name for that thing or set of things, whatever it is/they are, that constitute our telos. So this is a discussion of happiness.\
\
### Is there telos like happiness for humanity? Destiny and destination\
\
I would like to begin a discussion of happiness by distinguishing between two concepts: destiny and destination. \
\
Roughly, a destiny is an inevitable end. A destination is an *avoidable* end; it is a *chosen* end. Destiny does not contain within it (at least not necessarily) any intentionality. An asteroid many light years away from the moon (let's say) has a destiny of hitting the moon in 180,000 years. It's trajectory, and the coincidental perfect timing of the absence of any intervening objects, makes contact inevitable. \
\
A destination is different. When I told my mother I was moving to Kentucky *to get a PhD in philosophy* I was not describing my inevitable destiny, but describing my chosen destination. Many intervening factors could prevent me (car trouble, illness, etc.) -- and what's more, many factors could *dissuade me* (lack of jobs, money trouble, etc.). \
\
Happiness is our human destination. It is not, sadly, our human destiny. \
\
There is no one factor that seems to capture our destiny except biological death. The major candidates for a hoped-for destiny are not universal: Health, reproduction, and survival. Not all living things are healthy, not all successfully reproduce, and in the end none survive. \
\
But is there a universal human destination? If so, is it merely biological or something more -- perhaps neurophysiological, psychological, or spiritual?\
\
All living things *strive* for health, survival, reproduction and genetic propagation. But all living things, in the end, die. Individuals die when their metabolism stops, when if they have brains all brain functions stop, when they stop moving, and so on. Species "die" when they go extinct. \
\
Socrates is mortal. All men are mortal, and Socrates is man. But so are you and I "men" (the species, not the sex). So our destiny is biological death. \
\
What is our destination? Survival? The avoidance of death? Eternal life? Salvation? Evolution? Pleasure? "Permanent human happiness?"^[The Dalai Lama proposed this formulation.] Peace and nonviolence? Knowledge? The vision of God? Freedom from the wheel of reincarnation? Each of these guesses has something to commend it. \
\
1. The avoidance of death by medical science and/or evolution. This is the transhumanist project of Ray Kurzweil, Google's Calico, and Nick Bostrom. \
2. The avoidance of death by salvation from God as a free gift, or through faith or holiness or both. This is the Christian vision of \
3. The achievement of pleasure while life lasts. This is formalized despair. There is no happiness, therefore eat drink and be "happy" with scare quotes in bold. Our destiny is all we have, so we have no destination. Enjoy the journey until the journey dumps you into the trash compactor. \
4. The vision of God. This is the peculiarly Christian vision. \
5. Freedom from the wheel of reincarnation. \
\
One major distinction can be drawn between these various views along the question of how long human life lasts. Is human life (ideally) about 80 years, or more as medical science advances? Or is the human life countless millennia? This is a factual question that, of course, bears on the question of our telos. \
\
Is there any one conception of happiness that can coordinate these two views? If not, then no discussion of happiness can proceed before either proving or assuming an answer about the length of human life. \
\
Clearly, proving an answer to the satisfaction of all is a fool's errand. It is a  massive, contentious question. One can formulate it in terms of human personhood, the "immortality of the soul," and so on. Andrew Bailey's recent paper calls this the "persistence question": Do human animals have strictly biological persistence conditions?\
\
> Most contemporary animalists also say \'91yes\'92 to the persistence question. According to these animalists, a human animal lasts across an interval just in the case that its \'91purely animal functions \'96 metabolism, the capacity to breathe and circulate one\'92s blood, and the like \'96 continue' across that interval. We may, following Eric Olson, call this theory about the persistence of animals the \'91Biological Approach\'92.\
\
If so, what criteria would such a view have to satisfy? \
\
Given that human beings are rational animals that live either approximately 80 years or forever, what is our destination? The disjunction embedded in the question opens up a discouragingly wide range of possible answers. Nevertheless, let us try to answer it \
\
If there is any *one* thing that animals seek, it is determined by their nature. In my terms, their nature provides a "destiny". But our rational nature makes our way of life variable and hence pluralizes our destiny until death consolidates all those differences again. Hence if there is any *one* thing that rational animals seek, it is determined by the nature of rationality itself. Clearly, different people and cultures vary in believing and valuing particular objects. But variance is compatible with a single telos or single *plurality* of teloi. \
\
Variance is compatible with error. \
\
Is there anything rationality seeks by nature? Knowledge. What about practical rationality? Goodness. That is, knowing things *is what reason does*, and pursuing good things *is what practical reason does*; reason also avoid false things, and practical reason avoids evil. \
\
Happiness, the destination of every human being, is to know truth and to attain as much goodness as possible -- whether in the span of 80-90 years (barring illness, injury, and ) until biological death or for the rest of time. \
\
That this is our telos is possible to know even without knowing whether, in fact, our existence persists beyond biological death. \
\
According to Sartre, we must despair. According to Russel we must despair. According to these two, despair is the rational emotion, the emotion that makes most sense given the facts; the emotion that \'93fits\'94 reality. \
\
I think despair is a rational emotion if we are animals who amass goods for 80 years or so and then die, and if our species will eventually go extinct and all habitable planets in the cosmos will become uninhabitable. However, like Russel, the pursuit of knowledge is still worthwhile. It is our human \'93ideals of goodness and knowledge\'94 (I paraphrase Russel) that remain worthwhile pursuits even under the shadow of despair cast by that great reality of death. \
\
\
### Teleology in nature\
\
### What if there are no ends in nature? ##\
\
One powerful objection to the recovery of telos is that there is no teleology in nature. There are no *ends* (\uc0\u964 \u949 \u955 \u959 \u953 ). Call this position *teleological nihilism.* There are two forms of teleological nihilism: extreme and moderate. Extreme teleological nihilism we may call the view that there are no "purposes" or natural ends anywhere in the world *including* in human actions. Even our practices, behaviors, and lives are purposeless, even to ourselves. Moderate teleological nihilism we may call the view that there are no natural purposes *except* those in human actions, intentions, and societies, etc. On moderate teleological nihilism, human purposes are not instances of a broader category that includes the tendency of an acorn to become an oak and the tendency of deer to survive and reproduce; human purposes are sui generis phenomena that spontaneously emerge out of our brains at a certain level of complexity. Final causation thinking is then projected out onto the world by us; we observe that the beaver gathered wood and that the beaver built a dam and we say "the beaver gathered wood *in order to* build the dam." But really the beaver did no such thing. This is what philosopher of biology Ernst Mayr calls "teleonomic" natural behavior, but not genuinely teleological.[@mayr1992teleology] \
\
Teleological nihilism claims as its evidence *modern science* as a whole. Natural sciences have dismissed the notion of final causation for three or four centuries now and have gotten along well without it. In fact, natural sciences and the experimental, empirical methods that advance them have progressed far more than anyone could have dreamed. In part, this success is the result of giving up magical thinking. \
\
### Teleology\
\
[% out of order]\
\
That nature is normative and some norms are natural is the best explanation of two phenomena: (1) human cognitive and and practical behaviors are inherently end-directed or teleological: John goes to the gym *in order to get fit for his film role*; Jane practices her speech *to win the Iowa primaries*; and (2) animals, plants, and all living things exhibit end-directed or teleonomic behavior: eyes see, hemlock trees offers shade to fish, stomachs digest, deer leap. The first of these phenomena is less controversial: pretty clearly, humans *act on reasons* and in pursuit of ends. The second is more controversial and more interesting -- is the appearance of teleology "just" teleonomy or teleology indeed? \
\
Call the view that there are no natural end-directed behaviors *teleological nihilism*.[@arnhart1988] 'Strong nihilism' can refer to the belief (of say determinists) that not even human practices are teleological. 'Weak nihilism' can refer to the belief that *only* human behaviors are end-directed, but nothing else. For example, Kant's explanation of natural purpose denies the biological theory that the form of an organism causes the parts to grow and relate to each other in a particular way, but he admits we *cannot help thinking so*.[@huneman2006naturalising] If the "nature is normative" thesis is true, both forms of teleological nihilism are false. \
\
### What if ends are reducible? ###\
\
Teleoreductionism has taken one of two popular forms: the first reduces 'teleonomic' (that is, apparently teleological) biological functions to causal contributions to a system and the second reduces teleonomic biological functions to naturally selected effects. A proponent of the first reduction is Donald Davidson; a proponent of the second is Ruth Millikan. \
\
### Reducible reply ###\
\
Neither forms of 'teleoreduction' can account for the normativity of the biological function in question. If it is a fundamental truth not only that hearts cause blood to be pumped but that hearts *are for* pumping blood \'97 that is their natural function \'97 then teleoreduction comes to light as an unnecessary and sadly desperate attempt to preserve a philosophical dogma in the face of scientific fact. \
\
James Barham elaborates:\
\
>I was aware of well-known criticisms of both of the then-current reductionist accounts of function: the "causal-role" theory and the Darwin-inspired "selected-effects" theory. In a nutshell, the problem is that neither theory can explain the normative character of biological processes in a coherent manner. (Biological processes are "normative" in the sense that they may either succeed or fail in fulfilling their functions.) With respect to the "causal-role" theory, there is no way to distinguish between functional and non-functional parts of a biological system without presupposing the normative character of the overall system as a whole -- which begs the question at issue.\
>With respect to the "selected-effects" theory, the problem is that selection history is conceptually irrelevant to the identification of function. True, it has a role to play in explaining how present-day functions have come to exist. But selection history cannot possibly explain what it is about a biological process that constitutes it as a function. This is a logical point that Darwinists simply miss. The reason is that our concept of function in no way depends on evolutionary history. If it did, then biologists like Aristotle, Galen, Harvey, and innumerable others who lived long before Darwin would not have had the means to identify the functions of organs, which they of course did. Sometimes, they got it wrong, as when Aristotle placed the seat of perception and thought in the heart, instead of the brain (though some of his predecessors got it right). But Aristotle's mistake was due to his inadequate knowledge of physiology, not to his ignorance of evolution.\
\
Millikan bites the bullet on this objection. She isn't trying to do "conceptual analysis" of the term 'function.' She is willing to admit that her concept of proper function only applies to functional objects with histories and that hypothetical counterexamples involving functional objects without histories prove that two objects with one and the same "*mark* of purposiveness" can have different functions.[\
\
### Biological Teleology\
\
Teleological realism in biology is making a come-back. There are those who protest teleological nihilism. Arnhart persuasively argues that teleology is assumed in medicine.[@arnhart1988] Zammito clarifies ongoing relevance in biology, since organisms seem to be intrinsically purposeful.[@zammito2006teleology]\
\
> In a series of important articles and books over the past decade or so, Bedau (1990, 1992a, 1992b, 1993), Cameron (2004), Christensen & Bickhard (2002), Jacobs (1986), Manning (1997), Maund (2000), McLaughlin (2001, 2009), Mossio et al. (2009), Mundale & Bechtel (1996), Nanay (2010), Nissen (1997), Perovic (2007), Walsh (2006), and Zammito (2006) have cast grave doubt on the coherence of any reductive analysis of function. Some of these authors (e.g., Jacobs, Maund, Zammito) call explicitly for a reconsideration of the possibility that teleological phenomena in biology might be both objectively real and irreducible. \
\
The very word 'teleology' is liable to sound quaint to modern ears. Barham clarifies the range of terms that denote identical or similar concepts: \
\
>"By \'93teleology,\'94 I have in mind such words and concepts as \'93purpose,\'94 \'93end,\'94 \'93goal,\'94 \'93function,\'94 \'93control,\'94 and \'93regulation,\'94 as well as the real- world biological phenomena to which these words and concepts refer. This means that the word \'93teleology\'94 should always be construed here in its internal or \'93immanent\'94 sense\'97purposiveness existing in living beings themselves\'97and never in its external or \'93transcendent\'94 sense of an overarching cosmic principle" (Barham 1). For a similar distinction, see Lennox (1992) and Brown (2001). \
\
We can add "purposive" and "goal-directed" to the constellation of concepts in the offing. \
\
### Ruth Millikan\'92s objection \
\
Millikan argues that an organism\'92s proper function cannot be read off its capacities but must be known via empirical history. Both Barham and Thompson dispute this (influential) definition of "proper function." \
\
### Other writers on natural teleology \
\
Kevin Kelly, wired editor, what technology wants. \
Robert Right nonzero.\
Christian de Duve\
Robert OUsan? Our telos. \
\
> Natural teleology is unorthodox, but it has a long and honorable history. For example, in 1953 the evolutionary biologist Julian Huxley argued that it's in the nature of nature to get more advanced over time. "If we take a snapshot view, improvement eludes us," he wrote. "But as soon as we introduce time, we see trends of improvement."\
\
>More recently, Kevin Kelly, founding editor of *Wired*, made the case for teleology as clearly as could be in his book *What Technology Wants:* "Evolution ... has an inherent direction, shaped by the nature of matter and energy." That is, there may be laws of nature that push the universe toward the creation of life and mind. Not a supernatural god, but laws as basic and fundamental as those of thermodynamics. Robert Wright said much the same in *Nonzero: The Logic of Human Destiny:* "This book is a full-throated argument for destiny in the sense of direction." Those books prompted discussion among the literati but little backlash from evolutionary biologists. Ruse thinks that's because the authors are science writers, not scientists: "At a certain level, it's their job either to give the science or to put forward provocative hypotheses, and nobody takes it personally."\
\
\
>The paleontologist Simon Conway Morris, at the University of Cambridge, has argued that natural structures such as eyes, neurons, brains, and hands are so beneficial that they will get invented over and over again. They are, in effect, attractors in an abstract biological space that pull life in their direction. Contingency and catastrophe will delay them but cannot stop them. Conway Morris sees this as evidence that not only life but human life, and humanlike minds, will emerge naturally from the cosmos: "If we humans had not evolved, then something more or less identical would have emerged sooner or later."\
\
>Stuart Kauffman, of the Santa Fe Institute, who argues that the universe gives us "order for free." Kauffman has spent decades on origin-of-life research, aiming to show that the transition from chemistry to metabolism is as inevitable as a ball rolling down a slope. Molecules on the early earth, he suggests, inevitably began to catalyze themselves in self-sustaining reactions ("autocatalytic networks"), converting energy and raw materials into increasingly complex structures that eventually crossed the boundary between nonliving and living.\
\
>Other biologists are proposing laws that would explain evolutionary ascent in fundamental terms. Daniel McShea and Robert Brandon, a biologist and a philosopher of science, respectively, at Duke University, have argued for what they call a "zero-force evolutionary law," which posits that diversity and complexity will necessarily increase even without environmental change. The chemist Addy Pross, at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, in Israel, argues that life exhibits "dynamic kinetic stability," in which self-replicating systems become more stable through becoming more complex\'97and are therefore inherently driven to do so.\
\
>Still other scientists have asked how we could measure increases in complexity without being biased by our human-centric perspective. Robert Hazen, working with the Nobel Prize winner Jack Szostak, has proposed a metric he calls "functional information," which measures the number of functions and relationships an organism has relative to its environment. The Harvard astrophysicist Eric Chaisson has proposed measuring a quantity that he calls "energy-rate density": how much energy flows through one gram of a system per second. He argues that when he plots energy-rate density against the emergence of new species, the clear result is an overall increase in complexity over time.\
\
>But Nagel's goal was valid: to point out that fundamental questions of origins, evolution, and intelligence remain unanswered, and to question whether current ways of thinking are up to the task. A really good book on this subject would need to be both scientific and philosophical: scientific to show what is known, philosophical to show how to go beyond what is known. (A better term might be "metascientific," that is, talking about the science and about how to make new sciences.)\
\
>The pieces of this book are scattered about the landscape, in a thousand scraps of ideas from biologists, physicists, physicians, chemists, mathematicians, journalists, public intellectuals, and philosophers. But no book has yet emerged that is mighty enough to shove aside the current order, persuading scientists and nonscientists alike, sparking new experiments, changing syllabi, rejiggering budget priorities, spawning new departments, and changing human language and ways of thought forever. On the Origin of Species did it in 1859. We await the next Darwin.^[Michael Chorost is the author of Rebuilt: How Becoming Part Computer Made Me More Human (Houghton Mifflin, 2005) and World Wide Mind: The Coming Integration of Humanity, Machines, and the Internet (Free Press, 2011).]\
\
\
\
### Three characters, one successful, one virtuous, one both successful and virtuous\
\
The first character I should like to keep before our imagination is the Successful Man: wealthy, powerful, influential, well-connected, owning lots of land, designer clothes, and jets. This is Bruce Wayne, Donald Trump, or Hilary Clinton. We can playfully imagine them furthermore in the peak of life in beauty, health, and vigor. Whether or not this person is virtuous seems to be beside the point: they are Successful. They may not be wise but they enjoy the richness of the \'93aesthetic life.\'94\
\
The second character is the Scrappy Sage: even though these wise, unyielding in principle, scrupulous, discerning, practical, reliable,  beneficent, large-minded, generous, unflappable, just, undeceived and undeceivable, undistracted by petty pleasures, and far-sighted regarding the affairs of this life. This is Diogenes, Symeon Stylites, or John the Baptist who were despised for their lack of Success but admired and sought out for their Sagacity. They are ascetic sages but rejecting the aesthetic and embracing the \'93ethical life.\'94 \
\
The third is a combination of worldly success and virtuous sagacity: wealthy but wise, powerful but unyielding in principle, influential but scrupulous, well-connected by discerning, full of possessions but practical. This is King Solomon, Cato the Younger, or St. Katherine of Sienna. \
\
The question \'91why be good?\'92 is asked by someone who is earnestly in doubt as to whether it is better to be more like Solomon or St. Katherine than like Donald Trump or Hilary Clinton. They might agree that virtue and success together are better than virtue and no success; they are earnestly in doubt as to whether it would be better to have success without virtue or virtue without success. So the question \'93why be good?\'94 is not the question \'93Why be motivated at all?\'94 but \'93why not be motivated, after all, by success with or without virtue?\'92. \
\
This question is echoed by Eryxias: even supposing someone were as wise as Nestor, wouldn\'92t such a person be miserable without food and drink and clothes and the like? What *advantage* is wisdom? The assumption here is that the meaning of  \'93advantage\'94 is advantage for *us* here and now, not just abstract admirable qualities. \
\
If virtues is partly constitutive of flourishing (even \'93success\'94), then the question \'91why be virtuous?\'92 is close \'97 if not identical \'97 to the irrational question \'91why do what is worth doing?\'92. It is a conceptual confusion. However, if virtue is not constitutive of flourishing, then the question of whether *I* really ought to let virtue be the over overriding practical consideration instead of the alluring temptations of wealth, riches, sex, and power in however great of quantities I can achieve. \
\
So my first thesis in this chapter, is this: virtue causes human flourishing but also partly constitutes it. This is my first step toward solving the problem of why be good. \
\
Many neo-Aristotelians use \'93flourishing\'94 to translate the untranslatable \'93eudaimonia.\'94 Eudaimonia is the human telos. telos is, of course, Greek for "end". The word is bursting with dizzying array of possible meanings, including "definite point", "goal", "purpose," "cessation," "order," "prize," "highest point", "realization", "decision", and "services."[@liddell1896intermediate compare with Strong's 5056: "telos tel'-os from a primary *tello* (to set out for a definite point or goal); properly, the point aimed at as a limit, i.e. (by implication) the conclusion of an act or state (termination (literally, figuratively or indefinitely), result (immediate, ultimate or prophetic), purpose); specially, an impost or levy (as paid); continual, custom, end(-ing), finally, uttermost."] There are at least two kinds of teleology we can distinguish between: natural and social.[@barham2011] Natural teleology is not *intentional*. Social teleology is. The type of teleology the Aristotelian tradition takes for granted is natural teleology, of which social teleology is an instance in human rational creatures. \
\
So our telos is eudaimonia. What is eudaimonia? Answering this question is treacherously difficult. \'93Religious\'94 pagans like Aristotle thought it was the intellectual life of an (Athenian) gentlemen. Christians like Aquinas think it is the beatific vision of God after this life is over, including the time after a bodily resurrection. Atheists and other noble secularists such as Russell and Murdoch think that eudaimonia is a particular kind of virtuous and wise life here and now, despite the coming darkness. (Less noble secularists opt for cocaine, sex, whisky, heroine.) These are different reactions, but both are reactions to formalized despair. On a happier note, or perhaps equally anxious note, Ray Kurzweil and other transhumanists think that even this life can be extended, perhaps a little, perhaps a lot, which would afford more time to explore just what eudaimonia might be. I do not here bother to mention theories of reincarnation Is there any way to coordinate these views? \
\
Virtues play some important part in happiness, unless the immoralist consents to the despairing notion that if death ends all, then life is meaningless and so eat drink and be merry. \
\
The old Stoic line was the noble belief that virtue is *all* of eudaimonia. There is nothing more to be desired but virtue; \'93virtue is it\'92s own reward.\'94 The Aristotelian line was, not surprisingly, a bit more human. The life of virtuous activity is necessary but not sufficient for eudaimonia. Also needed are money, friends, and some good fortune. In a sense, the fully virtuous man or woman could be a victim to the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune and lose all. But this is just a way of saying that tragedies can indeed happen. Socrates would, with superhuman stubbornness, deny it. *Nothing* can harm the good man; and nothing save the bad one.\
\
### Minimal and Maximal Conceptions\
\
I would also like to distinguish between minimal conceptions and maximal conceptions of happiness. A minimal conception includes a necessary condition or set of necessary conditions the absence of which plausible constitutes *misery*. Peter Geach alludes to this kind of conception when he argues that only a broad basis of ethical agreement is needed for two groups to work together on building a hospital or running a university.[@geach1977virtues] Alasdair MacIntyre\'92s conception of telos in *After Virtue* is what I have called \'93minimal\'94. A maximal conception of happiness is more imaginative, certainly, but more divisive. A maximal conception imagines what state of affairs or what human activity constitutes *full and completely satisfying human life* \'97 fulfillment to the highest imaginable degree. Boethius pretty clearly aims for this kind of conception when he argues that the good of man is complete self-sufficiency and hence cannot but any \'93false happiness\'94 such as wealth, power, or pleasure but must be participation in God himself.^[*Consolation of Philosophy*, Book III.] \
\
Natural law theorists like to talk about \'91perfections\'92 of nature, and happiness as \'91perfect\'92 or complete. I prefer the term \'91maximal\'92 to \'91perfective\'92 for two reasons. First, the concept of maximum is relative to circumstances; one should aim to be as happy as possible *given the limitations of time*. This clause includes theist and atheists in the conversation since they may disagree on just what the limitations of time are but agree that we should aim to be as happy as possible. Secondly, the notion of perfection implies that human nature has natural limits of happiness, a terminus. I\'92m not sure this is true. It might be that, so long as one lives well, and so long as the average lifespan of western industrial peoples continues to increase. Is there a natural limit, for instance, to how many languages one can learn? I know three languages. With enough time before my biological end, couldn\'92t I learn ten? Someone more gifted with languages already knows ten and could learn twenty. If they lived 200 years, couldn\'92t they learn thirty languages? Is there a natural limit to wisdom? Can one become fully wise and then stop? Continuing the discussion using the notion of relative maximum keeps the case open on this issue. \
\
\
\
## Telos objections\
\
One family of objections pertains to teleology. If MacIntyre's suggestion that we need to recover the Aristotelian tradition of the virtues is to be taken as a serious plan, then we must recover telos, for without a clear telos even a high moral earnestness attached to virtues devolves into an unintelligible set of rules or traditions. Virtue without telos literally has no point.[^4] This constellation of objections is, I think, most potentially disastrous for MacIntyre's theory, and the objections are powerful. In addition to the real philosophical difficulty of the matter, the prejudices and misconceptions surrounding teleology are so thick one would need several chapters to dig through the muck and mire. I think an adequate response can, ultimately, be made. \
\
[^4]:A society that enforces chaste behavior and honors chastity as a virtue but does so without any understanding of how such chastity fits into the fulfilled life of a fully virtuous human being and a fully virtuous community will be open to the criticism that such behaviors and virtues are prohibiting a whole range of pleasurable activities.\
\
In this section I shall present three objections from teleology that are especially problematic for MacIntyre's narrative. The first objection regarding teleology is to deny MacIntyre's historical narrative. Oakes above eloquently summarized MacIntyre's criticism of  the loss of telos in modern moral philosophy, natural science, psychology, and ethics. But perhaps modern moral philosophy is not so anti-teleological as all that. Kant's categorical imperative, much vaunted for its austere duty for the sake of duty, is actually aimed at perfection.[@ward1971kant] Keith Ward argued with some impatience almost 40 years ago (10 years before *After Virtue*'s first edition) that Kant should not be interpreted as commending duty as some abstract, context-free obligation. He says: \
\
>Kant's position is not merely that one must conceive oneself as setting up a purposive order of Nature, according to universal laws, as though one could arbitrarily choose anything whatsoever as one's purpose. One can see this if one takes Kant's list of examples of moral duties in the *Metaphysic of Morals* [sic]. Masturbation is against the *purposes of Nature*, in forming the sexual organs; suicide contravenes *Nature's purpose* in establishing self-love in order to preserve life... Finally, "holiness of will" must be pursued, as this expresses the absolute worth of the human person, in its freedom from sensuous impulses and its transcendence of Nature.[@ward1971kant 341] \
\
These quotes from the allegedly dour-faced deontologist certainly sound awfully similar to Aristotle (not to mention St. Paul). Along similar lines, Kantian ethicist David Cummiskey has argued that Kant can be understood as a consequentialist of sorts.[@cummiskey1996kantian] The proposal is that Kant's *justification* for moral normative principles was a brute, formal, categorical imperative, but the *content* of such normative principles included agents and the goods they aim to attain. Happiness can be valued as an imperfect duty, though rational agency must be valued as a perfect duty. Without entering into all the interesting details at this juncture, the thought is that perhaps a (thoroughly modern) moral philosophy like deontology can be synthesized with natural teleology. \
\
The other putatively modern moral philosophy that comes in for criticism for MacIntyre, Anscombe, et. al., is Mill's utilitarianism. But isn't consequentialism teleological in the proper sense of telos. Clearly, consequences are *ends* of actions -- I go to work *in order to* earn a paycheck at the end of the month; the consequence (my paycheck) is the goal or purpose or point of the action (going to work). For consequentialism, the great intrinsic value is happiness, or pleasure. On the surface, this sounds like a kind of Aristotelian eudaimonism. But Aristotle's eudaimonia is the necessary end of all action and all practical reasoning. The proof that we pursue eudaimonia (something vague) is as robust as the proof that we pursue *anything at all*.[@aristotle Book I.1] Similarly, all that Mill can say to the enquirer who wants to hear about *why* happiness is desirable is that people desire it.[@mill chapter 4. *Of what sort of Proof the Principle of Utility is Susceptible*. He says, "The only proof capable of being given that an object is visible, is that people actually see it. The only proof that a sound is audible, is that people hear it: and so of the other sources of our experience. In like manner, I apprehend, the sole evidence it is possible to produce that anything is desirable, is that people do actually desire it. If the end which the utilitarian doctrine proposes to itself were not, in theory and in practice, acknowledged to be an end, nothing could ever convince any person that it was so. No reason can be given why the general happiness is desirable, except that each person, so far as he believes it to be attainable, desires his own happiness."] So perhaps virtue ethics can be synthesized with consequentialism. \
\
A second objection regarding teleology grants MacIntyre's pessimistic narrative. Ethics can get along well enough without intrinsic *teloi*. We cannot accept natural teleology since this notion has been exorcised from natural science (and from all rational philosophy) by Darwin and Newton. Bernard Williams summarizes this feeling well: \
\
>It seems to me that a correct understanding of evolution is relevant to projects of this kind, but that the effect of that understanding is largely discouraging to them... the idea of a naturalistic ethics was born of a deeply teleological outlook, and its best expression, in many ways, is to be found in Aristotle's philosophy, a philosophy according to which there is inherent in each natural kind of thing an appropriate way for things of that kind to behave... The first and hardest lesson of Darwinism, that there is no such teleology at all, and that there is no orchestral score provided from anywhere according to which human beings have a special part to play, still has to find its way fully into ethical thought.[@williams1995making]\
\
Williams' objection is a general objection from metaphysical naturalism to *any* form of naturalistic ethics. Rosalind Hursthouse says that, "From early on, Williams has expressed pessimism about the project of Aristotelian naturalism on the grounds that Aristotle's conception of nature, and thereby human nature, was normative, and that, in a scientific age, this is not a conception that we can take on board."[@hursthouse1998virtue 256] His objection is ostensibly against the notion of natural teleology but also against a realist notion of human nature as well. If humanity as it is today is a more or less jumbled "bricolage" of adaptive parts, it is hardly a secure enough entity to ground ethical obligations. \
\
Thankfully, morality can function without it. The moral law *by itself* guides or forms our actions without a natural telos performing that function. For example, Christine Korsgaard [@korsgaard1996sources] builds a case that human autonomy -- the ability to be a law to oneself -- is the source of normative authority. How does this work? My own identity as a human being obligates me to behave morally. She argues that "autonomy is the source of obligation" and that "we have *moral* obligations... to humanity as such."[@korsgaard1996sources 93] Because I am self-reflective, I am accountable for what I do. Also because I am self-reflective, I have a self-conception. She says the "thinking self" regulates the "acting self." Korsgaard's notion of practical identity is that we assume identities such as human being, child, parent, teacher, etc. Each identity is functional; it grounds obligations. If I am really to be a teacher, I must show up for class. If I really am to be a parent, I must feed and educate my child. Practical identities may be more or less contingent. All of us are children; not all of us educators. At least one practical identity is necessary. That is our practical identity *as humans*. Humans "need to have practical conceptions of our identity in order to act and live."[@korsgaard1996sources 106] The fact is, we do act and live. Therefore we do have a moral identity. Put another way, she says: \'93Rational action is possible only if human beings find their own humanity to be valuable.\'94[@korsgaard1996sources 106] The moral identity is one in which I take up a viewpoint as a member of the "Kingdom of Ends", the community of those who also have a moral identity. So the moral law delivers content-full moral duties derived from my own autonomously legislated rules prescribed by my valuing humanity; these rules are not teleological in that they require any future fulfillment of an end to validate them. \
\
The point of these objections is to push back on MacIntyre's narrative in which our modern liberal tradition excised telos. Either we did not do so, or (even if we did) we could get along without it. \
\
These three objections -- about relativism, tradition-constituted rationality, and teleology -- are some of the most telling against MacIntyre's theory. In the discussion section I shall attempt to answer each one. \
\
>It has often been suggested -- by J. L. Austin, for example -- that either we can admit the existence of rival and contingently incompatible goods which make incompatible claims to our practical allegiance or we can believe in some determinate conception of the good life for man, but that these are mutually exclusive alternatives. No one can consistently hold both these views. What this contention is blind to is that there may be better or worse ways for individuals to live through the tragic confrontation of good with good. And that to know what the good life for man is may require knowing what are the better and what are the worse ways of living in and through such situations. Nothing a priori rules out this possibility; and this suggests that within a view such as Austin's there is concealed an unacknowledged empirical premise about the character of tragic situations.[@macintyre1984after 223-4]\
\
\
\
### Telos is needed ###\
\
One objection above stated that telos is indeed a necessary part of morality, but that it can be found in modern morality, for instance, in Kantian or consequentialist morality. If the sense of teleology we are using here is merely social and not natural, then MacIntyre would respond, "so much the better for Kant." Moral rules are unintelligible without an understanding of the *internal* or *necessary* relation between some actions and some outcomes. Kant himself, perhaps, understood this better than many of his contemporary readers give him credit. \
\
\
### Telos is not needed ###\
\
Consequentialism, however, cannot be made to be "teleological" in the Aristotelian or the MacIntyrean sense. The first reason is that, For Mill, happiness is something too specific: pleasure, or freedom from pain. He offers precious little justification for this. Mill's definition of happiness cannot be that thing we all necessarily pursue whenever we act, because then moral rules (guiding us toward the happiness of the greatest number) would be unnecessary. We would all, already, pursue happiness. \
\
The second reason is more important: The reason is that Mill and others define "consequences" so as to be always contingent. Mill, like Moore, sees the relation between the end (happiness) and the means (actions that bring about happiness) as statistical, contingent, and probable. There is no internal relation between some actions (such as virtues) and the proper end of human life.\
\
Take as a few examples this statement from G.E. Moore: \
\
>What ought we to do?  The answering of this question constitutes the third great division of ethical enquiry; and its nature was briefly explained in Chap. I (\'a7\'a7 15\'9717). It introduces into Ethics, as was there pointed out, an entirely new question\'97the question what things are related as *causes* to that which is good in itself; and this question can only be answered by an entirely new method\'97the method of empirical investigation; by means of which causes are discovered in the other sciences. *To ask what kind of actions we ought to perform, or what kind of conduct is right, is to ask what kind of effects such action and conduct will produce.* Not a single question in practical Ethics can be answered except by a causal generalization. All such questions do, indeed, also involve an ethical judgment proper\'97the judgment that certain effects are better, in themselves, than others. But they do assert that these better things are effects\'97are causally connected with the actions in question. Every judgment in practical Ethics may be reduced to the form: This is a cause of that good thing.[@moore Chapter 5, Section 89, my emphasis.]\
\
Moore is explicit here that there are no acts that have intrinsic value (qua duty or qua virtuous deed); acts only have value insofar as they cause good effects. This good effects are, for Moore, aesthetic enjoyments, knowledge, and friendships.[@moore Chapter 6.] \
\
The refusal to treat the means/end distinction as clean and absolute is liable to cause critics to misunderstand the neo-Aristotelian position. Charles Taylor endorses the notion that \'93the place accorded the virtues [is] a kind of litmus test for discriminating Aristotelian from modern ethical theory.\'94[@taylor 25] He explains this feature of modern moral theories:\
\
>...They cannot abide this kind of relation, in which one element is both cause and constituent of another. It is a central demand of one influential construal of modern reason that one clearly sort out means from ends. For utilitarians, the good is happiness, and virtues can only be good instrumentally... If the basic point of morality is to do the right actions, then the virtues must be seen as purely executive. They cannot also be seen as part of the end, because the end is not defined that way.[@taylor 25] \
\
What could this mean? Behind the means/end distinction is a peculiarly modern assumption that formal and final causes are either not related or not *necessarily* related. But the assumption is unreasonable. Exercise *causes* (efficient causes) health; but it is partly constitutive of health. In other words, exercise *causes* (formal causes) health.  The relation between a formal cause and a final cause is an internal, natural, and necessary relation. In biology, the distinction between form and function is a real one but the two are related.^[@huneman2006naturalising. Huneman summarizes the "two poles" in the history of biology: "the concept of form and the concept of function." For Huneman, anatomy studies form and physiology studies function. He explains how Kant understood both poles and tried to give due weight to the mechanistic understanding of organisms *and* to the distinctive features of organic life. Humean, Kant, and evolutionary biologists are obliged to explain both form and function as real without reducing one to the other.] The relation between the species *gorilla gorilla* as instantiated in an infant gorilla and a fully grown, mature one is an internal and natural and (given the proper circumstances) a necessary relation. To deny that there are formal causes, or to deny that there are final causes, is simply to beg the question against teleological ethics. \
\
For these reasons, consequentialism of the typical sort that *reduces* the question of what actions, rules, or character traits are good to a question that cannot "be answered except by a causal generalization" is not teleological in the required sense. The character traits that tend to bring about happiness must also be, in a sense, pre-payments on that happiness. \
\
\
\
\
### Section conclusion ###\
\
In sum, the rebuttal of the \'93no teleology objection" is that the sort of teleology we need is defensible: social teleology. Social teleology does not *necessarily* offend against Darwinian biology, evolutionary psychology, or metaphysical naturalism, but can (and must) be accommodated by them. Furthermore, Kantian philosophy may be able to accommodate social teleology, and so would escape the brunt of MacIntyre's criticism laid out in his narrative. On the other hand, the rebuttal of consequentialism, is that it has not often been taken to allow for a necessary relation between some means and their ends. Virtuous action both *causes* and *partly constitutes* virtuous character. Virtuous character traits both *cause* and *partly constitute* the kind of achievement of our human telos that makes life worth living. \
\
\
\
\
\
### Objection: Our telos is gene propogation\
\
Stephen Brown\'92s Darwinian objection that \'93happiness\'94 of our species is gene propagation, which seems to transform ethics into a descriptive discipline; \
\
### Notes\
\
Julia Driver puts the distinction well: \'93While it is true that virtue must lead to human flourishing, virtue is not concerned solely with human flourishing. Kindness directed towards a dog is still a moral virtue, even though it contributes to human flourishing not one whit.\'94[@driver2004response]\
\
\
The human good is not "flourishing" conceived as an external, contingent consequence to be discovered (in part) and designed (in part). The human good is *to be human*, including all of the particular content entailed by that life form. Humanity is not a merely formal concept, as some have thought (Kant is often attributed this). For Kant, humanity is an end in itself.  \'93Humanity is nothing other than the capacity freely to set particular ends.\'94[@guyer2002ends 162] But merely to be free is not sufficient for humanity. To be free to be human is necessary; but to be human to be free is a paltry, empty, and possibly miserable state. \
\
\
\
# Neo-Aristotelianism: Normative Ethics and Metaethics\
\
*\'93The most striking occurrence in the history of thought between Aristotle and ourselves is the rise of modern science.\'94* \\\
\
-- John McDowell, "Two Sorts of Naturalism" in *Mind, Value, and Reality*, 174.\\\
\
\
## Introduction\
\
My thesis is about virtue, human nature, and natural flourishing. These themes are squarely within contemporary analytic virtue ethics. That said, there are many strands or branches of analytic virtue ethics.^[McDowell, Foot, and MacIntyre are each, in their own way, rather idiosyncratic exemplars of the "analytic philosophy".]  As Martha Nussbaum and others have pointed out, self-styled 'virtue ethicists' can differ as much as any other two ethicists. (Is there a tent big enough to include Plato, St. Paul, Thomas Aquinas, and Benjamin Franklin?).^[Nussbaum argues that a more helpful taxonomy would distinguish between neo-Humean, neo-Kantian, and neo-Aristotelian theories; an even more fruitful path would be simply to debate the substantive issues, such as the role of reason in morality as compared to the role of emotions and desires and other sub-rational psychological phenomena. Cf. @nussbaum1999virtue. Pretty clear, neo-Humean virtue theory is an underexplored but exciting sub-field I shall unfortunately not explore. Neo-Kantian virtue theory is discussed by Foot and McDowell and so receives passing attention in these chapters.] While I shall not devote excessive time to comparing my offering to those of other recent virtue ethicists, it is important to state, up front, that I see the best hope in neo-Aristotelian theories.\
\
### Neo-Aristotelianism\
\
My thesis attempts to address issues that arise from the recent neo-Aristotelians. Who are the neo-Aristotelian virtue theorists? Rosalind Hursthouse provides an authoritative list: Anscombe,[@anscombe1958; @anscombe1957intention] Geach,[@geach1977virtues and 1956] Foot,[@foot2001natural] McDowell,[@mcdowell1998mindvalue; @mcdowell1996mind] MacIntyre,[@macintyre1999dependent.] Hursthouse,[@hursthouse1999] Nussbaum,^[@nussbaum1995aristotle;  @nussbaum1988non; @nussbaum1999virtue] and Thompson.^[@thompson1995representation] I would only add the great Julia Annas[@annas2011intelligent; @annas1993morality; @annas2009egoism; @annas2006virtueethics; @annas2004being]  (who is of course a scholar of ancient philosophy but whose recent work has been largely devoted to contemporary ethics), and some more recent players in the movement such as Christopher Toner[@toner2003flourishing], Stephen Brown[@brown2008virtue; @brown2005really], Jennifer Frey[@frey], James Barham[@barham2011], Allison Postell[@postell2013comes], and Arthur Ward[@ward2013against]. \
\
One could certainly construct a worthwhile project analyzing all or some subset of authors. I interact regularly with a broader set of virtue ethicists:^[The broader set includes @murdoch1998sovereignty; @swanton2003virtue; @slote1992morality; @bloomfield2003moral; Richard Kraut, Robert Adams, Gopal Sreenivasan, Rachana Kamtekar, Talbot Brewer, and R. Scott Smith. Also, in @thomson2008normativity, Thomson provides a neo-Aristotelian account of normativity.] For example, the early writings of Peter Geach, Bernard Williams, and Iris Murdoch are responsible for gathering the kindling and setting the spark for contemporary discussions of virtue.  \
\
Nevertheless, my main sources are Philippa Foot, John McDowell, Rosalind Hursthouse, and Alasdair MacIntyre. These three defend views that share enough similarities to illuminate many important themes while contrasting enough to motivate rich discussion.  For example, they all address (in their own way) all three elements of "the virtue triangle".^[For example, McDowell, Foot, and MacIntyre can be seen using this schema: Cf. @mcdowell1979virtue and @mcdowell1980role; @foot2002virtues and @foot2001natural; @macintyre1984after and @macintyre1999dependent. All three themes are, of course, important to Aristotle as well. But I shall reference historical sources such as Aristotle or Aquinas only occasionally and only for convenience; my primary purpose is not historical.] \
\
### The recent rise of virtue ethics\
\
It is difficult to read any "old books" without noticing that virtue talk (in a great variety of theories and contexts) was once a normal part of cultural and intellectual life, in the west and beyond.^[The Google Books Ngram viewer quantifies the use of the term 'Virtue' (with a capital V) and 'virtue' (lowercase v): 'Virtue' peaked in 1750 at 0.01%, meaning that 1 in every 1000 words in books published that year were the word "Virtue". For comparison, "the" is 5% of words, or about 50 in every thousand. "Virtue" fell by 1900 back down to 1600 levels (0.0001%, one in every million). The lowercase "virtue" likewise has dropped steadily since the 1790s.]  But it is equally difficult not to notice that virtue talk had receded to the background or disappeared from academic discussions for two or three centuries. Its resurgence in the last 60 years has been well documented.[Cf. @crisp1996how] Not everyone is impressed by the alleged benefits accruing to 'virtue ethics', of course -- Nussbaum is not the only one to find the designation unhelpful. Nevertheless, it would have amazed Elizabeth Anscombe if, more than 60 years ago, she could have known that in 2014 as many professional academic philosophers would identify as 'virtue ethicists' as identify as 'deontologists' -- about 1/5th each.[@chalmers2014philosophers] So how might we explain the resurgance of a category of virtue ethics, however loosely defined? \
\
There are a few reasonable options. Considering them will help frame my project. The first interpretation is that something went profoundly wrong in the development of modern moral philosophy. The Enlightenment and post-Enlightenment thinkers turned away from tradition and religion in order to venture a universal, abstract, public, rational theory of morality. But perhaps something essential was lost as our ethical thinking had to adjust to advancements in modern science and changes in modern politics. As science turned outward to the external cosmos (often excluding the human), ethics and politics turned inward (often excluding the external cosmos.) Perhaps these imbalances made it inevitable that there would be equal and opposite errors: some would fall for the kind of Nietzschean subjectivism where no political or religious authority can correct the Great Individiaul, while others would fall for Hobbesian legalism, where no individual can correct the political and religious authorities. This first intrepretation of the rise of virtue ethics presents virtue concepts as corrective of some modern imbalance. Hence, it pits virtue theories against their consequentialist and Kantian alternatives. It finds in the flexibility of Aristotle and the humanism of Confucius a refreshing alternative to the stolid rationalism of Kant or Mill.^[This interpretation, of course, is a substantive moral thesis couched in the language of a historical thesis. So it is debatable whether this story is even true *as history*. I shall try to remain neutral about the history and discuss the substantive theory.] \
\
Anscombe takes the interpretation that something has gone wrong with modern moral philosophy. She diagnoses all the "English-speaking ethicists" from Sidgwick forward as "consequentialists" and diagnoses all forms of consequentialism as morally depraved. She argues that any secular theorists (such as Kantians) who appeal to an absolute, verdictive moral 'ought' are borrowing from a medieval divine law conception of ethics which is incoherent without the corresponding belief in a divine lawgiver. The alterative, she offers, is the Aristotelian 'ought' which critiques vice without blame and commends virtue without 'the moral ought'. In her view, virtue talk allows non-religious moderns to retain evaluative talk without a divine law by making it something closer to aesthetic talk. \
\
MacIntyre is another who takes this interpretation. His famous "Disquieting Suggestion" pictures modernity as a post-apocalyptic, fractured moral and social world grasping at pieces of a prior shared understanding of the good.^[Cf. MacIntyre, *After Virtue*, chapter 1, "A Disquieting Suggestion."] Though he is often classified as a 'virtue ethicist', McIntyre himself rejects the label for not even modern virtue ethics goes far enough to restore the Aristotelian and Thomistic tradition which he advocates.\
\
\
Rosalind Hursthouse and Martha Nussbaum offer a second interpretation that is less combative. While they concede that virtue ethicists in the early 20th century presented their view as a *rival*, they think such rhetoric was necessary to fight for a position at the table of respectable ethical theories. And it worked. So it would be needlessly combative to continue with the "rivalry" presentation now that virtue ethics has earned its place as one of the "major moral philosophies" at the table. On this interpretation, virtue concepts can augment, rather than replace, other moral concepts. Nussbaum elaborates: "\'91virtue ethics\'92 so-called does not figure as a normative rival to utilitarian and deontological ethics; rather, its (fairly) recent revival is seen as having served the useful purpose of reminding moral philosophers that the elaboration of a normative theory may fall short of giving a full account of our moral life."[@hursthouse1996normative]  After all, Kant himself had a theory of virtue.[@baxley2010kant] Some theorists have been working to articulate a theory they call \'93virtue consequentialism\'94 or \'93character consequentialism\'94.[@bradley2005virtue; @driver2001uneasy; @hurka2003virtue. Copp and Sobol say: There has never been any doubt that consequentialist theories could accord to the virtues a derivative or indirect moral significance. If we begin with a simple direct form of consequentialism, we could add to it the thesis that the virtues are the states of character such that, if people generally possessed them, more good would result than if people generally had other states of character. On such an account, the virtues would be instrumentally of value." (@copp2004morality 515)] Even more broadly, philosophers have even found room for virtue talk in Humean[@slote2003sentimentalist] and Nietzschean[@swanton2003virtue] virtue theory.\
\
In my view, there is some truth to each of these interpretations. While it is true that virtue talk is flexible enough to enhance non-Aristotelian theories, there is an identifiable core of western virtue theory. That core is part-and-parcel of a larger Aristotelian tradition that is in competition -- or at least in tension -- with the Enlightenment tradition. The core of an Aristotelian tradition I have in mind corresponds roughly to Nussbaums "common ground" underlying a wide variety of \'93virtue ethicists\'94.[@nussbaum1999virtue 170. One difference is that Nussbaum's "common ground" includes Kant and Mill and Sidgwick, whereas neo-Aristotelians critique Kant and Mill's ethics along the lines I shall elaborate below: they are not holistic enough about action, human personhood, and human life.] At the same time, certain features of the modern Enlightenment tradition -- especially advances in modern science and changes in modern politics  -- can correct errors or update contingencies in the Aristotelian tradition. \
\
I would like to say a bit more about these mutal "corrections" (if they are corrections).^[I shall attempt to justify some of these assertions in a later chapter.] Elizabeth Anscombe, Peter Geach, Bernard Williams, Iris Murdoch and others have done philosophical ethics a valuable service by correcting certain myopic tendencies.\
\
**The whole action:** The first myopic tendency of modern philosophical ethics is a undue fixation on evauating discrete, particular actions. This is the kind of ethics that only knows how to ask "Is X wrong?" (substituting for X some particular moral action, such as abortion, or lying, or nuclear proliferation).  If morality is about individual acts or even about kinds of action, it seems to be the case that either moral rules are to be followed for their own sake or else they do not matter (for only consequences matter). If, on the other hand, the obligation to be virtuous is only one point on the virtue triangle, then the other two points provide much needed context. If we know who and what we are prior to acquiring virtues, and we have some picture of who and what we have the potential to be, then it becomes more likely that we will not see moral rules as arbitrary impositions or as unaccountable -- like bolts of lightning from a clear sky. The neo-Aristotelians are insistant on this point. Martha Nussbaum argues we cannot construct an ethical theory by discussing only \'93isolated moments of choice.\'94[@nussbaum1999virtue 174] The correction is to ethically examine *whole actions* -- such as cooking a meal, earning a degree, raising up a disadvantaged people group -- where whole actions are conceptually united bundles of individual actions. We shall return to these themes in a later chapter. \
\
**The whole person**: The second myopic tendency is that of focussing on one aspect of moral psychology (such as motive, or emotion, or character traits) to the exclusion of others. Continuing with Nussbaum's "common ground", she says, \'93Even though a concern for motive, intention, character, and the whole course of life was not in principle alien to Kantian and Utilitarian philosophy, it was certainly alien to most British and American Kantians and Utilitarians of the period.\'94[@nussbaum1999virtue 173] The correction to this tendency is to include a role for both reason and the passions, and to specify those roles. However, two groups display very different strategies in including the whole person. For Nussbaum, the first group consists of characteristically \'93anti-Utilitarians\'94 who want reason to play a much larger role than Mill (or the typical Utilitarian) would wish; the second consists of characteristically \'93anti-Kantians\'94 and want sub-rational psychological states to play a much larger role than Kant (or the typical Kantian) would wish. The first group defend the plurality of goods, rationality\'92s role in deliberating about which ends to pursue and its role in organizing, ranking, and harmonizing that plurality of goods, the rational character of some emotions, and the need for a rational critique of the broader social and political setting in which \'93defective passions and judgments\'94 are formed.[@nussbaum1999virtue 180] This is an oversimplification but a helpful one. (I return to the relation between emotion and rationality in a later chapter.) By this distinction, it will be plain that my thesis is much more clearly "anti-utilitarian" than anti-Kantian. The emotions, desires, motivations, passions -- the numerous variegated sub-rational mental states of normal human psychology -- can be made rational and/or can be accommodated within a rational pattern of life, the same way a garden of plants can exhibit a "rational pattern" (i.e., flowers in squares or rows) that has clear purpose and order, even though the plants themselves are obviously not thinking beings.\
\
**The whole life**: A third myopic tendency is that of philosophizing about individual moral dilemmas instead of the whole of life. Virtue ethicists have tended to reframe arguments to look not just at individual choices or actions (viewed from the outside, like a moral critic) but to look at the whole of life (viewed from the inside, like a moral agent). For example, Elizabeth Anscombe and Bernard Williams have done as much as anyone to remind moral philosophers that questions of what is wrong are posterior to, and often less troublesome than, the question "How ought I to live?" The 'how to live?' question is not optional for normal, reflective, adults. Of course, the two questions are related. But if the relation between individual actions and the whole of life is the relation between parts and their whole, then the intelligible whole must be grasped first.  MacIntyre scholar Stanley Hauerwas argues that "the central contention in *After Virtue* is his remark that \'93the concept of an intelligible action is a more fundamental concept than that of an action.\'94[@macintyre1984after 209. Hauerwas continues: This may seem a small philosophical point, but much revolves around it: His understandings of the centrality of practical reason, the significance of the body for agency, why the teleological character of our lives must be displayed through narrative, the character of rationality, the nature of the virtues, why training in a craft is paradigmatic of learning to think as well as live, his understanding of why the Enlightenment project had to fail, his particular way of being a historicist, and why the plain person is the necessary subject of philosophy." @hauerwas2007.] Similarly, Jennifer Frey (following Anscombe) argues that "no part of an intentional action is independently intelligible as a part, aside from an exercise of practical knowledge of the action as a whole."[@frey 123]  That is not to say that moral quandaries are unimportant in life or unimportant in theory. Philosophical nonsense can often be exposed with a cutting counterexample, even a wildly hypothetical one. In life, moral dilemmas are real, if blessedly rare -- at least the kind of great moral dilemmas encountered in great works of fiction (*Othello*, *War and Peace*, *Gilead*). The point is that the more specific 'what to do?' question that arises in times of moral crisis or crossroads is less common than the general 'how to live?' \'93Character ethics,\'94 rather than mere \'93quandary ethics\'94 is what is really needed in the vast majority of circumstances.[@pincoffs1971quandary; Cf. also @trianosky1990virtue] Ninety-nine parts of any given day have no great dilemmas or great temptations to do evil. Rather, ninety-nine parts of any given day are filled with habits, long-held goals, and small choices between competing or conflicting goods that all seem worthwhile but cannot all be pursued. (Check email or grade papers? Use a spare hour to write more or read more? Apply to jobs in state near family or out of state near friends? Invest in this friendship or spend much-needed time alone?)  Hence, philosophical ethics can and should return to such practical questions. \
\
\
\
**The whole history**: A fourth myopic tendency that these virtue ethicists have corrected, I think, is an *ahistorical* approach that had become fashionable in analytic ethics during the apex and aftermath of logical positivism. Many had such a passion for mathematically clear, abstract, lucid and timeless articulations of their philosophy such that if an ethical theory could not be so articulated, it could be ignored. Furthermore, such philosophers easily fell for the temptation of regarding the contingencies of the present fashion as unquestionable timeless truths. \
\
The correction to this tendency is to allow that ethical norms are typically bound up with social norms, and so to allow that ethical norms have a history; and that the social and ethical norms of the present day may be little more than fashion.  Many neo-Aristotelians and others studied classics or history in addition to ethics, or prior to ethics. Long familiarity with cultures, places, and times other than one's own has a salubrious effect of helping one to see one's own culture and time. (For many people, "culture shock" occurs not when leaving one's home country, but when returning home from a very different foreign country.) Likewise, philosophers who have spent long hours conversing with Aristotle or Aquinas are likely to notice more easily the assumptions, biases, strengths, and weaknesses of our own modern context. Jack Weinstein observes that Alasdair Macintyre did for ethics what John Rawls did for political philosophy: where Rawls re-invigorated political philosophy, \'93inaugurating the dominance of late twentieth-century liberalism\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 38], MacIntyre helped to re-invigorate analytic ethical philosophy (especially the ascendancy of late twentieth-century virtue ethics) by freshly examining ethical concepts in light of history.[@weinstein2003macintyre chapter 4.] MacIntyre argues that we can only responsibly use and evaluate practical concepts such as self, practice, telos, or virtue when we know our own history. Since *we ourselves*  inhabit a tradition, we must know ourselves *as* inhabitants of a tradition with a past. We will return to these themes in later chapters. \
\
These are corrections that virtue ethics can offer to other modern moral philosophies. But the modern world is not the ancient world. Modern science, philosophy, and culture are not the same as their pre-modern counterparts. It is imperative that contemporary virtue ethicists pay due respect to what *has* changed. What corrections can modernity offer to virtue ethics? \
\
As McDowell suggests in the quotation above, an admittedly vague initial answer is that Aristotelian virtue ethics needs to be modified to match with modern science.^[A second possibility is that virtue ethics needs to be put in conversation with modern liberal social and political thought. Is virtue ethics intrinsically classist, or sexist? MacIntyre thinks not. In so far as he discusses these matters, *some* such conversation will be touched on in a later chapter. A full treatment is, of course, outside the scope of this dissertation.]\
\
\
## Three Goals\
\
To put the matter simply: the Neo-Aristotelian virtue theory of the sort I am discussing has three goals: to be normatively ethical, naturalistic, and appropriately scientific. Each of these goals is difficult. \
\
Ethics is "normally" taken to be normative, in that it commends specific virtues, such as moderation, tolerance, and practical wisdom, but normativity is no easy concept. As Alan Gibbard says: "[Part] of what's special about morality is that it operates in the \'91space of reasons;\'92 it concerns justification and oughts. The term \'91normative\'92 is central to much current philosophical discussion. There's no agreement on what this technical term in our discipline is to mean, but it involves, in a phrase drawn from Sellars, being somehow \'91fraught with ought\'92."^[@gibbard2003normative 321] So by 'normative' throughought I shall mean 'ought' talk and those facts to which 'ought' talk might refer.^[Cf. @schaber2005normative. Schaber defends normative realism -- the view that there are normative facts -- but his realism is non-naturalistic.] Ethical naturalism is typically agnostic or atheistic in that it does not depend upon any particular religious ethic, but there various sorts of naturalism, as I shall explain below. And modern virtue ethics has the opportunity to draw on the latest scientific research in ethology, anthropology, evolutionary biology, sociology and so on. But should it? What does empirical science have to do with ethics? \
\
This brief review indicates that the neo-Aristotelian project is attended by difficulties on all sides. I would like to say a bit more about each of these three goals. \
\
\
### Philosophical Ethics\
\
The recent neo-Aristotelians offer what we might call a complete philosophical ethics. In general, 'ethical naturalism' is a name for any view of ethics that accords with metaphysical naturalism. In this sense, ethical naturalism includes a wide variety views, many of which are "deflationary conceptions" of ethics such as the "non-cognitivist, prescriptivist, projectivist, relativist"[@boyd2003finite 504]  or any other anti-realist conception. These views vary, but each of them acknowledges the "purported objectivity"[@gibbard1992wise 287] of morality but aims to "debunk it"[@gibbard1992wise 154] in various ways. \
\
In a narrower sense, however, 'ethical naturalism' is name for some types of moral realism. Moral realism is the view that the objective purport of morality -- its apparent importance, bindingness, and so on -- are to be explained but not explained away. In this sense, ethical naturalism is one way of *explaining moral reality*. The ethical naturalist, as James Lemnan puts it, affirms that "there are objective moral facts and properties and that these facts and properties are natural facts and properties."[@sepmoralnaturalism. Alternatively, Russ Shafer-Landau's moral realism is not a metaphysical but an epistemological thesis: moral facts *can be known* apart from knowing natural facts. Some moral truths are self-evident. Cf. @shafer2003moralrealism.] Ethical naturalism's rivals are supernaturalism (wherein moral facts are real and somehow divine), non-naturalism (wherein moral facts are *real* but not identifiable with any natural facts), and anti-realism (wherein there are no moral facts). \
\
The Neo-Aristotelian theories I am introducing here are examples of moral or ethical naturalism in this narrower sense. They think the apparent importance of morality is to be explained, and can be explained with reference to what attributes or goods human beings need *because of who and what they are*. \
\
Neo-Aristotelians such as Foot, McDowell, and MacIntyre converse about normative ethical and metaethical claims, often in the same book.  Put differently, their theories have aimed to provide a normative ethics (detailed content about the kind of life one ought to live and the kinds of traits one ought to acquire) as well as a ground of morality in moral metaphysics, moral psychology, moral epistemology, etc. \
\
This combination of sub-disciplines is a source of worries about taxonomical confusion. James Lenman's summary of neo-Aristotelianism is a good example of this worry:\
\
>One important school of thought ... [is] work is inspired by that of Aristotle. This view has its roots in the writings of G. E. M. Anscombe, P. T. Geach and the early Philippa Foot among others. Its contemporary representatives include the later Foot, Rosalind Hursthouse, Martha Nussbaum and Judith Jarvis Thomson. As this list makes clear, this is very much the official metaethical theory of the main current in contemporary virtue ethics. [@sepmoralnaturalism. Lenman acknowledges that Thomson might need to be subtracted from this list and that John McDowell might need to be added.]\
\
Lenman seems bemused with neo-Aristotelian naturalism. When he says that neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism is  "the official metaethical theory of the main current in contemporary virtue ethics" he seems to betray a lurking metaphilosophical confusion. For when Foot, Hursthouse, McDowell are classified as virtue ethicists (a normative theory) *and* neo-Aristotelians (a metaethical theory), we might object. Aren't these two different projects? The answer in short is: not necessarily. Explaining this answer requires a short discursus.\
\
One legacy of G.E. Moore's *Principia Ethica* has been the tendency to sharply distinguish primary ethical questions (about what things are good) from metaethical questions (about what 'good' as an evaluative predicate *means*). The first asks about what things are good; the second about the word 'good' itself. The first is a substantive question about which items fall under a category. The second is a conceptual question about how to define that category. \
\
Moore valiantly took it upon himself to indict all previous ethical philosophers for failing to resolve their disputes for a failure to define their terms. (Of course, the questions that concern modern metaethicists were posed and discussed by prior thinkers. However, the *Principia* gave a distinctive form to these questions and suggested a distinctive range of possible answers.) Moore argued (or according to some critics, *assumed*) that \'91goodness\'92 was indefinable.[@frankena1939naturalistic. Frankena's classic essay makes this point best.] That is, the good could not be defined in terms of any other property. It is false that \'91goodness is pleasure\'92 for our pursuit pleasure is a psychological fact, not an ethical one; it is false that \'91goodness is whatever is most real\'92 for something's reality is a metaphysical fact, not an ethical one. \
\
Now, it is tautologous that if goodness really is indefinable, then any attempt to define it will fail. Any attempt to reduce the concept to a concept of lesser intension, or to translate it, will fail. But is there something necessarily erroneous about inferring "ought" statements from "is" statements?^[Moore had a preferred name for this error -- if it is an error -- but mentioning it would just muddy the waters. If absolutely necessary, I shall only call Moore's version "The Fallacy That Shall Not Be Named."] I will address his worry in a later chapter (chapter 3).  \
\
Lenman's confusion reflects Moore's belief that questions of moral language and questions of substance can "come apart." But this is not *necessarily* true. The neo-Aristotelians are pretty universally critical of Moore's starting point, as we shall see.[@foot2001natural chapter 1, "A Fresh Start?"; @macintyre1984after chapter 2, "The Nature\uc0\u8232  of Moral Disagreement Today and the Claims of Emotivism".]  Furthermore, Alan Gibbard, who is no opponent of metaethics in general, is well aware that one's substantive ethical views can determine one's view of the relation between questions of substance and those of meaning:\
\
>Moore stressed the distinction in ethics between questions of meaning and questions of substance, and thereby gave rise to a tradition in analytic philosophy of separating the two parts of ethical theory: the metatheory and the substantive, normative part. Some philosophers have rejected the distinction; some Kantians, for instance, think that if you get the metatheory right, substantive ethical conclusions fall out as some kind of consequence, so that metaethics and substantive ethics are not really separate. Then too, anyone who rejects Sidgwick's and Moore's indefinability claim and thinks that ethical terms can be given analytic, naturalistic definitions thinks that the two putative subdivisions are not really separate. Those who reject any systematic distinction between questions of meaning and questions of substance might likewise reject a sharp, separate subject of metaethics.[@gibbard2003normative 320]\
\
I think Gibbard is right, here. One's substantive views will affect one's preferred philosophical taxonomy. Kantians and (some kinds of) naturalists will deny the strict separation. To allow the seemingly innocuous separation of formal from material aspects of a topic might just unwittingly beg the question against a range of acceptable views on that topic.\
\
As evidence, notice the conspicuous pattern that advocates of a neutral, procedural, formal metaethics seem to endorse first-order consequentialism. Moore himself, though non-naturalist, was a consequentialist as well, so we ought to expect that he separate the formal metatheory from the substantive moral theory. Not only Moore, but theorists as different from each other as J.L. Mackie, Frank Jackson, Richard Boyd, Peter Railton, Simon Blackburn, and Alan Gibbard all endorse some form of consequentialism. To echo Lenman, we can say that the view that metaethics is separable from normative ethics is very much the official theory of a main current in contemporary consequentialism. Richard Boyd makes much the same point: \
\
>...although nothing like entailment between these positions obtains, the idea that moral questions are questions about how we can help each other flourish seems central to contemporary naturalist moral realism. In a certain sense, some version of consequentialism seems to be the *natural* position for naturalist moral realists.[@boyd1988moral 505-6] \
\
This is the first response to Lenman's worry about fusing ethics and metaethics in one theory. Neo-Aristotelianism, like Kantianism, is a view wherein ethics and metaethics cannot and do not "come apart." They are, rather, procedural and substantive aspects of the same thing; they are formal and material aspects of the same thing. They might be *distinguishable* in thought, but they are not *separable*. \
\
A second response is possible. Even if the formal aspects can be made neutral with respect to the normative, material aspects, it is still admirably ambitious to construct a theory that pays attention to both. In support of this notion, Stephen Darwall points out that normativity is at the heart of both ethics and metaethics: \
\
>...although metaethics and normative ethics are properly focused on different issues, they need to be brought into dynamic relation with one another in order to produce a systematic and defensible philosophical ethics. This mutual dependence is owing to the fact that issues of normativity are at the center of the concerns of both metaethics and normative ethics.[@darwall2003should] \
\
Hence, my thesis is squarely an ethical argument concerning what character traits are worth pursuing (e.g, moral and intellectual virtues) and what traits count as virtues (e.g., moderation, practical wisdom). However, an adequate defense of this thesis requires assessment of foundational metaethical considerations (e.g., is the human life form a sufficient grounding of moral facts? How do we know what to do?) \
\
As neo-Aristotelianism is a species of ethical naturalism, it is a species of moral realism. But 'moral realism' refers to a wide range of views. Do I expect that my argument will persuade a moral anti-realist? It depends on the anti-realist; one whose real objections causes him or her to suffer a worrisome despair about ethics  may be persauded by sufficiently cogent arguments about objective value. But another who poses only hypothetical objections and demands that ethical considerations satisfy an impossibly high standard for epistemic consent is not likely to find in this argument what they desire.\
\
\
### Three Sorts of Naturalism\
\
In what sense is neo-Aristotelianism naturalistic? There is a general and a specific answer to that question. Genearlly, neo-Aristotelians identify moral facts with natural facts about *some* aspect of humanity. As Rosalind Hursthouse says, "Virtue ethics, or at least any form of it that takes its inspiration from Aristotle, is usually taken to be a form of ethical naturalism -- broadly, the enterprise of basing ethics in some way on consideration of human nature, on what is involved with being good *qua* human being."[@hursthouse1998virtue 192] The hope is that if we can say what a *good human being* is, we shall be well on the way to describing what kinds of actions are right and wrong, or what kind of character traits are admirable or blameworthy. \
\
More specifically, there are several brands of such neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism: Are the natural facts or properties in question biological properties (Foot), our shared human life form itself (Thompson), shared rationality (McDowell), a characteristic way of life (Hursthouse), or something else? Three sorts concern us here. \
\
The first is Philippa Foot's.  Foot's sort of neo-Aristotelianism aims to discover that "the status of certain dispositions as virtues should be determined by quite general facts about human beings."[@foot2001natural 45] She goes further than just basing evaluative properties on "considerations of human nature"; she identifies goodness and badness with the *natural properties of organisms in general* (such as health, functionality, and disease). Humans are one type of natural organism, so perhaps morality is one type of natural goodness. \
\
Jennifer Frey summarizes the "master thought" of Foot's brand of neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism:\
\
>The ethical naturalist\'92s master thought is this: man needs the virtues just as much as a bee needs its sting. Such a thought is intriguing insofar as it takes the ethereal and elusive \'91moral ought\'92 and brings it back down to earth, by locating it within a wider structure of evaluation we already readily grasp and acknowledge as objectively valid.[@frey 5]\
\
One of the potential attractions of Foot's type of ethical naturalism is that, by bringing the 'moral ought' into closer contact with empirical disciplines, ethicists can more fully avail themselves of the fruits of modern science. As Joyce points out: "Key contributions can be made [in ethics] by social and developmental psychologists, experimental economists, neuroscientists, geneticists, primatologists, anthropologists, comparative ethologists, and evolutionary biologists."[@joyce2013ethics 1] Mark Murphy calls Foot's hypothesis a type of "secular natural law theory". It aims to apply to ethics natural normative notions such as 'necessity', 'ought', and 'health', which are already in use in biological and other sciences. \
\
Indeed, although neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism has many rivals, it has proven to have a surprisingly broad appeal. It has appealed not only to philosophers but to specialists in other academic fields, such as sociology, anthropology,[@brown2016configurations] business and accounting,[@west2016ethics] bioethics, public health ethics,[@ortmann2016public] education,[@carr2005virtue] and others. For example, sociologist Amanda Maull summarizing the issue like this: \
\
>Drawing upon the works of philosophers such as Philippa Foot, Richard Kraut, and Martha Nussbaum, the claim is made that there are moral properties and facts that are natural (rather than occult or supernatural), which are derived from certain innate dispositions and capacities of living things (i.e., those associated with growth and self-maintenance as opposed to destruction or harm). Human beings have evolved as social creatures with special capacities for speech and reason such that specification of \'93human flourishing\'94 is more complex and problematic than it is for plants or animals. For the human being, the idea of the \'93good life\'94 goes beyond biological survival and pertains to potentially ambiguous concepts such as virtue, happiness, and \'93well-being."[@maull2013deweyan 577]\
\
Yet Foot's view is by no means the default view. Certain objections are commonly raised. Stephen Brown summarizes a "charge... frequently levelled at ethical naturalism, *viz.* that it seeks to 'reduce' ethics to something else, perhaps biology, perhaps to something even more 'fundamental' like physics."[@brown2008virtue 5] John McDowell doesn't *quite* accuse Foot of this mistake; nevertheless, he thinks her theory is dangerously close to the kind of mistake that would "biologize" ethical theory, turning *normative* ethics into a merely *empirical* discipline. His criticism of such a mistake is that it falls prey to the "Myth of the Given"^[@mcdowell1996mind. McDowell borrows this phrase from Sellars. Cf. @sellars1956empiricism] -- roughly, the notion that some conceptual content (including ethical norms) can be just *given*, for free, in perceptual experience. \
\
While criticizing Foot, McDowell is also a neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalist in the narrower sense described above: he thinks moral values are real, yet he denies that they are parts of the empirical world of bald nature and denies that they are part of some other, non-natural realm. What is the alternative? This is the second sort to be discussed. \
\
For McDowell, moral values are part of the "space of reasons", or "second nature."[@mcdowell1996mind.] "Second nature" is for McDowell our own rational consciousness in so far as it is enculturated by language, custom, evaluation, habit, and a way of seeing the world.^[Compare with Hegel: "The habit of the ethical appears as a second nature which takes the place of the original and purely natural will and is all pervading soul, significance, and actuality of individual existence." @hegelright 195.] McDowell's "second nature" is inherently rational but also social, and depends on our intersubjective "form of life." Hence, values are "secondary qualities" of nature, partially constituted by the mental act of the observer. Human virtue, on this account, is a sort of perceptual sensitivity to "what a situation requires."[@mcdowell1979virtue] One is not perceptually sensitive to a primary natural fact, but to a dispositional property -- a property that is partly natural and partly constituted by the rational appraisal of the moral agent (i.e., "second nature").\
\
McDowell and Foot both lay claim to the title of 'neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism', since neither wishes to completely debunk morality but neither wishes to accept a source that is supernatural or non-natural. \
\
But, as we can see, McDowell and Foot represent two very different "sorts of naturalism."[@mcdowell1998two; @fink. Both of these articles will be discussed in detail in a later chapter.] These internecine controversies are more than a war of words. A heuristic oversimplification might be that one finds a grounding for real moral values in the context of rationality (that is, the conscious, the subjective, the cultural or intersubjective) while other finds it in a broader context of biological functionality (that is, the physical, the scientific, and the objective).  would be to say that one sort emphasizes biology  while the other sort emphasizes rationality ). Both see the importance of grounding ethical facts in natural facts, but Foot thinks that scientifically accessible natural teleological facts are live candidates; McDowell does not. \
\
The fault line here is a real one. Each represents an understanding of the difference between nature and normativity, between "facts and values".[@putnam2002collapse]  This dilemma, I think, explains the innocent confusion from Lenman and others about who actually deserves the title of "naturalists". Lenman points out in a footnote that Thomson probably shouldn't be on this list and that John McDowell probably should. He says "McDowell is certainly pervasively inspired by Aristotle and he describes himself as a naturalist. See especially his 1995. But I suspect many philosophers would find his use of the term  'naturalist' here somewhat Pickwickian."[@sepmoralnaturalism.] Such confusion arises from Lenman's assumption that nature is purely descriptive, with no "ought". Moore and those influenced by him, both naturalists and non-naturalists, have agreed with the underlying assumption that "nature" is strictly non-normative. But what if this assumption is mistaken? Putting the contrast in this way highlights the broader implications of this debate. At stake are the very concepts of 'nature', 'science', and 'human nature' which have been thematized in other important philosophical debates in metaphysics, the philosophy of science, philosophical anthropology, and others.\
\
\
Because of the deep fault lines between Foot and McDowell's sorts of naturalism, other neo-Aristotelians have also weighed in. They have either taken sides or aimed to find a third alternative that synthesizes the other two. For example, Rosalind Hursthouse's landmark monograph, *On Virtue Ethics*, picks and chooses: she builds on Foot's account in many ways, even though she agrees with McDowell in rejecting the search for an "external", objective, scientific foundation for virtue ethics. Alasdair MacIntyre's influential book, *After Virtue*, aligns more with McDowell in rejecting "Aristotle's metaphysical biology", but his later writings align more with Foot in arguing that "human identity is primarily, even if not only, bodily and therefore animal identity and it is by reference to that identity that the continuities of our relationships to others are partly defined."[@macintyre1999dependent 8] \
\
Between Foot's and McDowell's sorts of ethical naturalism, who has the upper hand? Is there any hope for a "third sort" of naturalism that draws from or synthesizes the other two? Can one unite "second nature" with "primary nature" -- unite, that is, the *rational/cultural/intersubjective* aspect of ethics with the *empirical/biological/objective* aspect of the same? I think the third sort is the best bet, as I shall argue in the chapters that follow. \
\
For now, let me stipulate my sense of 'naturalism.' Mine is an ethical naturalism in at least the following senses:\
\
1. My thesis is naturalistic according to what Hans Fink calls an "unrestricted conception of nature."[@fink 210] This conception expresses the idea, he continues, that "there is one world only, and that that world is the realm of nature, which is taken to include the cultural, artificial, mental, abstract and whatever else there may prove to be."[@fink 210]\
2. It is naturalistic in that I propose to use only the resources of human experience and the methods of philosophy and the natural sciences in identifying my initial premises and advancing my claims.\
3. It is naturalistic in that I argue that such philosophical and scientific methods applied to the world -- including to the biological world and to humanity -- are sufficient to derive my normative ethical conclusions. \
\
I would like to specify that while I am adopting methodological agnosticism about the existence of a God or gods, I am not adopting atheism. The importance of the difference will become clear in a later chapter. For now I will say that one of my limiting conditions is to to allow both that a monotheistic God might be directing all affairs to his purposes and guiding human beings by his commands and that, to (paraphrase Augustine), our hearts are restless until they rest in him; and to allow that human life might be a brief and beautiful flash of consciousness in an otherwise cold, pitiless, and dead cosmos, and that even so we ought to pursue all the virtues before we go extinct -- whether we do or "do not go gentle into that good night."^[I hope in future to research the relationship between virtue theory and religion, especially in Michael Sherwin, Michael Austin and others. Cf. @sherwin2005knowledge; @austin2013virtues.] There is no clear consensus among neo-Aristotelians about the role of religion in ethics; this diversity seems to me a strength. It gives some merit to the notion that one can evaluate virtue ethics grounded in natural normativity like one can evaluate electrons, integers, or evolution: these is *compatible* with the existence of a god but it does not *require* or *entail* the existence of a god.^[Compare with @engelhardt1996foundations. Engelhardt is a religious philosopher exploring the scope and limits of secular philosophy. While I shall end up agreeing with Engelhardt that secular moral philosophy (in the form of virtue ethics) remains fundamentally \'97 and perhaps dangerously \'97 pluralistic, I am a bit more optimistic than he about how far natural morality can go. Noah was not a Christian or a Jew was nevertheless "a righteous man, blameless among the people of his time, and he walked faithfully with God." (Gen 6:9) Even Abel somehow knew what sacrifice would be acceptable, perhaps because, as Paul says, he was "doing by nature the things contained in the law." Rom 2.14.] In this way, my project may be seen as building on Philippa Foot's work to advance a kind of secular natural law theory.^[Murphy: "The paradigmatic natural law view [e.g., Thomistic natural law] holds that (1) the natural law is given by God; (2) it is naturally authoritative over all human beings; and (3) it is naturally knowable by all human beings\'85  Recently there have been nontheistic writers in the natural law tradition, who deny (1): see, for example, the work of Michael Moore (1982, 1996) and Philippa Foot (2001)." Cf. @sepnaturallaw] This kind of "natural law" may also be seen as a kind of neo-Stoicism. Elizabeth Anscombe says:\
\
>One might be inclined to think that a law conception of ethics could arise only among people who accepted an allegedly divine positive law; that this is not so is shown by the example of the Stoics, who also thought that whatever was involved in conformity to human virtues was required by divine law.[@anscombe1958 5] \
\
While I shall concede that normative ethics cannot survive some philosophical environments -- such as aggressively reductive or eliminative physicalism -- I shall for present purposes remain neutral as to whether the natural norms discoverable in nature have a further, divine origin. \
\
My suggested name for this type of relaxed or liberal naturalism is Recursive Naturalism.^[I do not find this term anywhere in the literature. The only place I can find it is an obscure chapter of an obscure book about democracy: @kultgen2006problems. Errishi's nice little paper uses the term 'recursive naturalism' to mean something quite different than I am do here. He means something like "unquestionable completeness and adequacy", a vicious belief that one no longer need be open to criticism.] By this epithet, I aim to capture several facts. First, though human beings are natural and continuous with the rest of nature, human beings can hold nature in consciousness. With human beings comes into the cosmos intentionality or "aboutness." And one of the things that human beings can be conscious about is themselves, or all of the cosmos including themselves. The human mind contemplating nature is like the Droste Effect. Droste is a cocoa brand whose package features a painting of the girl holding a box of cocoa (which shows a painting of a girl holding a box of cocoa, ad infinitum.) Likewise, the human mind can know even that part of nature that is *the human mind consciously thinking about nature*. Nature recurs within nature, that one part of nature (us) knows nature (the cosmos) including that part of nature that we are. Secondly, my definition of virtue is recursive, since virtues are defined (in part) as those qualities that enable a moral agent to acquire more virtues. Thirdly, my definition of practical wisdom is recursive, since practical wisdom is defined (in part) as the know-how one needs to acquire more wisdom. Fourthly, my definition of human flourishing is recursive, since flourishing is defined (in part) as the state in which a human being is becoming more virtuous, becoming more practically wise, and discovering more detail about the definition of human flourishing. \
\
### Scientific\
\
It is imperative that contemporary virtue ethicists clarify the relationship of their theories to modern science. This was the thrust of the original "naturalism" that became dominant in America in the early 1900s. As David Papineau summarizes, "The self-proclaimed \'93naturalists\'94 from that period included John Dewey, Ernest Nagel, Sidney Hook and Roy Wood Sellars. These philosophers aimed to ally philosophy more closely with science. They urged that reality is exhausted by nature, containing nothing \'93supernatural\'94, and that the scientific method should be used to investigate all areas of reality, including the \'93human spirit\'94 (Krikorian 1944; Kim 2003)."[@sepnaturalism] Quine thought (or claimed he thought) that "naturalistic philosophy is continuous with natural science\'94^[(1995a), 256\'967, see also 1969, 126\'967.] but we should not forget that this continuity cuts both ways. It might be taken to mean that philosophy should be or can be more "scientific" (i.e., empirical and material); but it also might be taken to mean that science should be or can be more "philosophical" (i.e., abstract and formal). \
\
More broadly, 'naturalism' has become a kind of banner for a variety of views that are not supernaturalistic and place a high value on natural sciences. Such a broad definition is rightly seen to be almost infinitely inclusive: it does not exclude Spinozistic pantheism or panpsychism.[@skrbina2005panpsychism] \
\
Without further determination, therefore, the relationship between naturalism and morality is somewhat unclear. For example, some philosophers -- such as Michael Ruse and Sharon Street -- find in modern evolutionary theory incompatible with moral realism.[@street2006darwinian] Ruse's famous expression is that "morality is a collective illusion foisted upon us by our genes."[@ruse1986taking 253] Others -- such as Wielenberg and Thomas Nagel -- find evolutionary theory either irrelevant to morality or a possible source of *vindication* of moral realism.[@wielenberg2010evolutionary; @wielenberg2009defense] Given this indeterminacy, the attempt to capture all that is good in both the Aristotelian and modern traditions leads me to neo-Aristotelian naturalism. How can neo-Aristotelianism help, if at all, clarify the relationship between science and morality in particular, and (more generally) between facts and values, between 'is' and 'ought'? \
\
The modern "scientific" point of view (if there is *one* such view) is commonly supposed to be monistic or at least non-dualistic. Though not all are so confident,[@dupre2004miracle] there is a widespread preference -- whenever it is possible -- for ontological simplicity, epistemological parsimony, and aesthetic elegance. Non-dualism may have an ontological aim, or an epistemological one, or both. \
\
For example, eliminative physicalism is radically monistic but is unsatisfying in that it provides a clean explanation of "everything" only by leaving out some of the most important things (i.e., consciousness). The epistemological naturalism (of, say, John Shook) sees experience, reason, and science (together) as constituting the single method for acquiring knowledge of the world and ourselves. The neo-Aristotelian project takes this corrective to ethics and typically aims to avoid dualisms. It aims, rather, at a holistic picture of nature that includes humans and all living things within the cosmos and includes all parts of a human being (reason, emotion, desire, etc.). Margaret Atkins eloquently summarizes the holistic vision of these thinkers: \'93Anglo-American moral philosophy [has moved] beyond the limitations not only of A.J. Ayer and C.L. Stevenson, but also of Hume\'92s focus on sentiment, on the one hand, and Kant\'92s focus on reason on the other. Contemporary ethics is about the whole human being, seen as biological, social and cultural, emotional and reflective.\'94[@atkins2005morality] \
\
### A Dilemma for Ethical Naturalists\
\
I have said that my aim is to defend a genuinely normative ethical thesis about virtue that is nonetheless naturalistic. To some, ethical naturalism sounds like an contradiction in terms, like "weirdly normal" or "efficient DMV". Indeed, Hursthouse calls neo-Aristotelian an "odd sort" of ethical naturalism.[@hursthouse2013neo] Why? Some critics of neo-Aristotelianism push the following dilemma:[@frey describes the dilemma excellently in chapter 4. Cf. also @mauser2011ontological; and @woodcock2015neo.] Either ethical naturalism will not be genuinely *ethical* (i.e., normative and action-guiding)^[@brown2005really concludes that neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism is really naturalistic but is less ethical (i.e., normative) than might be wished.] or it will not be genuinely *naturalistic*.^[Cf. @rehg2003conceptual . Rehg et. al., conclude that neo-Aristotelian naturalism is really ethical but not sufficiently naturalistic. Cf. also @hacker2009natural; @hacker2009human.] \
\
On the former horn, if neo-Aristotelians succeed in naturalizing ethics, then it seems that normative categories such as virtue, vice, flourishing, human goodness, will be reduced to descriptive facts (.eg., virtuous people are statistically likely to flourish, flourishing is psychological health, etc.). But this seems hardly normative at all.  On the latter horn, if ethics remains truly normative, then we end up concluding that flourishing is the kind of state we *ought* to pursue whether or not we actually reach it \'97 whether or not, in fact *anyone* has actually reached it. Virtues are those qualities that are acquirable and that we *ought* to acquire, whether or not anyone does or ever has acquired them. \
\
This sounds hardly naturalistic at all. Now, on the one hand, questioning a theory's "naturalism" is pointless without further stipulation, for there are many types of naturalism. The word 'nature' -- like its cognates 'natural' and 'naturalism' -- is perhaps the most ambiguous, multi-significant word in our language. It seems that the only thing to be done is to stipulate a meaning and move on. On the other hand, though, the question of "naturalism" is tangled up with real, substantive issues. In the next two chapters, I shall attempt to untangle these issues and defend a conception of nature within which ethical evaluations are neither unnatural nor unreal. \
\
## Conclusion\
\
By taking advantage of the expansive definition of scientific naturalism, neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism defends a view of nature as normative in that it is (at least in some part) teleological. As difficult as it is to consider seriously the project of restoring natural teleology to its proper place and using it as a basis for ethical theory that is tenable and useful, I am optimistic it can be done. Many are on the project -- biologists, cosmologists, philosophers of science, mathematicians -- but philosophers in the Aristotelian tradition are uniquely situated to make advances. That tradition promises the resources with which to construct an ethical system including all three elements of MacIntyre's schema while rehabilitating a form of natural teleology that is not only tenable in light of modern beliefs, but rationally commends itself in light of all we now know. \
\
These chapters aim to show how it might be done, and to begin doing it. The thesis of the present work is that Foot undermines the cultural and social mediation of human goodness, while McDowell (and to a less extent, MacIntyre) undermine the physical and biological grounding of human goodness. The correct view is in between, both accepting the biological limitations on culture and accepting that culture supervenes on biology. My view is naturalistic in that it unites humans and nonhuman nature but does not commit itself to a reductive analysis of human things. (Certainly, this definition needs further comment. It will come in a later chapter.) It is anti-dualist without explicitly committing itself to physicalism on the one hand (with all the implausible reduction that physicalism entails) or rationalism on the other (with all the implausible idealism that rationalism entails). The conclusion I defend is a growing consensus that natural teleology upon which humanistic ethics may be grounded is no more mysterious or magical than biological life, or consciousness, or rationality. And hence, the pursuit of virtues is no more obsolete than any other human activity, such as farming, or laughing, or studying astronomy. As Wittgeinstein said: "Commanding, questioning, recounting, chatting, are as much a part of our natural history as walking, eating, drinking, playing."^[Wittgenstein, *Philosophical Investigations.* Section 124).]\
\
Virtue ethics is, on my view, a very useful guide to action,[@hursthouse1998virtue, chapter 1.] in personal life, political life, bioethics,[@beauchamp2001principles] business,[@beadle2015macintyre] and education.[@carr2005virtue] It would be an improvement to almost any area of human life if we were aware of our own vices and worked to expunge them, and if we understood the virtues and pursued them. Yet many obstacles from philosophical and social tradition stand in the way. My dissertation is part of an attempt to remove such obstacles and, in their absence, render not only palatable but desirable the pursuit and acquisition of virtues. \
\
Virtue, practical reason, and flourishing are age-old themes, and no worse for wear. Their recurrance in so many different cultures and places and times is a sign of their enduring significance. Treating them adequately may well be too much for one dissertation; as Glaucon said to Socrates, "The measure of listening to such discussions is the whole of life."[@plato *Republic* 450b.] \
}