{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red38\green38\blue38;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
15. By the first hypothesis, we should expect this: The qualities of being a good animal, speaking, acting, and thinking well given one's lifeform are, those that from the point of view of the alien anthropologist (a) make one a human being (fully exemplifies the human-life form) (b) make a human being admired by his or her fellows; furthermore, within the moral point of view, (c) one would judge such qualities really admirable -- in other words, such qualities would line up with one's own pre-analytical intuitions about what qualities count as morally praiseworthy. \
\
\
\
\
\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Our criteria requires that virtues would pertain to the three aspects of our nature identified in the generic: "humans are practical, rational animals." As animals we are inherently mortal, biological, beings whose life consists of a process of maturation, homeostatic maturity, aging, and death. Human being as rational *animals* by nature need to breathe, eat, sleep, and stay warm, deal with the urgings of our sexual nature, and so on. So our account of virtue will have to show how by reflection and deliberation, the virtuous person takes up his own biology and psychology into a space of reasons and construct a "pattern that, given the human situation, is likely to lead a good life."[@kekes1983wisdom 280] As practical, rational animals, we are inherently conscious and self-conscious beings who speak, interpret, and create in the context of a linguistic community such as a family, society, and culture. Although we are pushed about by our biological instincts and by social pressures, we do not *simply* stumble around through life, but, in general, also sometimes act on reasons. We deliberate about future actions, and reflect on past actions. The success of our actions is not guaranteed, and the reasonableness of our reasons is not guaranteed. So, we may tentatively hypothesize that the qualities that enable us to pursue our ends *well* would be excellent qualities. The practical, rational agents who consistently succeed at pursuing and achieving their ends would be models of virtue.  I shall have much more to say below about what ends people *have* or *ought to have* and about the indeterminate concept of a human telos.^[Eudaimonists believe our telos to be human flourishing or happiness. Others believe it is something else, such as genetic proliferation, the creation of the self, or what have you. We shall return to this in a later chapter] \
\
Recall the criteria that are guiding our construction of an account of the excellence of rational animals:  (1) Rationality is social, verbal, and symbolic (we learn to speak, to think, and to interpret from our family and community and culture). (2) Animality is social, physical, chemical, embodied (we must always care for the needs of nutrition, exercise, sleep, and our sexual nature). (3) Practical rationality is our active and proactive self-governance, including over all our thoughts and actions (we can affect but not choose the appearance, strength, size, etc. we start out with). \
\
The excellences and imperfections intrinsic to our life form are likely to relate to these three attributes. Excellences would be those character traits that rational animals *need*, tout court. They need them to *become* rational animals, to actuate the form. Imperfections, by contrast, would be those that rational animals *need to avoid*, traits that partially inhibit or wholly prevent the actuation of human life. While I will discuss in detail the natural human telos in a later chapter, here I only assert that actualizing the potential latent in human nature is necessarily good for us.[@bloomfield2012eudaimonia] \
\
We can predict that evaluative features of a human being will be either beautific or miserable along these lines. (We are not yet speaking of moral blame, just evaluation-of-a-kind). A maximally miserable human being is one who has for whatever reason not become what human beings potentially can be and are by nature. He or she will be (a) physically imperfect (sick, weak, undeveloped, diseased), (b) rationally imperfect (ignorant, stupid, overly credulous and overly skeptical, unperceptive, angry) and (b) practically and socially imperfect (solitary, foolish, rash, unteachable, immoderate, highly valuing worthless things and disregarding the most valuable things). The maximally beautified human being is one who has for whatever reason become what human beings potentially can be and are by nature. He or she will be (a) physically excellent (healthy, strong, developed, well); (b) rationally excellent in knowledge, society (knowledgable, smart, properly trusting and properly critical, perceptive, calm) and practice (sociable, wise, patient, teachable, moderate, valuing each thing according to its worth). \
\
Of course, such a prediction has some serious problems. \
\
For now, we are trying to get clear on the idea that the human life form fixes natural excellence and defect or imperfection. (I like "imperfection" because it connotes immaturity as well as defect.) The concept of 'excellence' is relative to an object's nature and function; an excellent knife is one that *cuts well*; but an excellent guard dog is one that barks loudly, is hostile to strangers, and so on. Artifacts receive their function by design, and even natural entities (such as dogs) have artificial functions insofar a they are trained by human users. It is tempting to assume that all functions are imposed on objects and that natural organisms (trees, dogs, humans) have no *inherent* function. Nevertheless, natural entities such as organisms have natural functions as well, as we have argued above. And, we argued, the teleological facts obtaining in organisms can be empirically discovered even remaining agnostic about its mechanistic or divine origin. That is, we can learn what acorns are by observing and reflecting upon their development from embryonic stages to maturity and the activities mature, typical members of the species exhibit. \
\
Similarly, we can hypothesis that the "function" of a practical rational animal is to become a fully mature practical rational animal, and perform all of the activities characteristic of typical members of the species. Not all practical rational animals fully actuate the human life form. Such failures to realize one's life form may still be tragic even if they are not that rational animal's *fault*. For example, in extreme cases when a person's set of potentialities for rational activity (such as speech and abstract thought) is not realized because of genetic disorder, injury, or mental or physical illness, we still have no trouble identifying that are *a human being* by virtue of having a *human nature*. }