{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
\
\
\
\
Toner argues that the brands of naturalism espoused by Thompson, Hursthouse, and Foot \'97 the same sort I have defended above \'97 cannot adequately respond to a criticism McDowell (among others) have pressed. \
\
Yet even though McDowell is critical of Foot's biological or organic naturalism, he does not wish to fall into a dualism between biology and rationality. Rather, he believes that it is possible to "formulate a conception of reason that is, in one sense, naturalistic: a formed state of practical reason is one's second nature, not something that dictates to one's nature from outside."[@mcdowell1998two] \
\
Toner presents four criteria that \'93naturalism must deliver if it is to support a revived Aristotelian virtue ethics\'85\'94[@toner2008sorts 222]  \
\
1. Natural norms must be intrinsically able to motivate the bearer of the nature. \uc0\u8232 \
The "natural norm" must be intrinsically able to motivate: desires that *do* motivate us satisfy this requirement. However, unless there is some "supervising principle" that coordinates desires (suppressing some, elevating others) the desires themselves seem to lead us to a sub-moral life; and the addition of such a supervising principle makes the theory no longer naturalistic. \
\
2. Natural norms must be intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of the nature. \
\
The natural norm must be something that justifies itself, either to all rational agents as such or to all moral agents. The norm need not, Toner admits, automatically persuade a Callicles to repent of his wickedness. However, it must be able to motivate. \
\
>This is why I say \'91\'91intrinsically able to motivate or justify\'92\'92 rather than \'91\'91intrinsically motivating or justifying\'92\'92: the natural norm is such that it can motivate or convince persons, provided they are not in too dysfunctional a state. In the same way a rose is such as to be intrinsically able to convince us of its being red. Its failure actually to do so in my case because I am color-blind or jaundiced does not impugn this intrinsic ability. Natural norms can motivate and convince because they are neither \'91\'91mere facts\'92\'92 about the way a given species does go on nor \'91\'91brute desires\'92\'92 a given species happens to have as a result of its evolutionary history.[@toner2008sorts 235]\
\
Micah Lott calls this the "authority-of-nature challenge"^[In @lott2012moral 770]. "The challenge depends on an apparent gap between what naturally good for us qua human beings (=the normal) and what has a claim upon our reason (=the normative)." Natural norms are either "normal" (i.e., natural) or "normative" (i.e., binding, authoritative, etc.)\uc0\u8232 \
3. Natural norms must be anchored in and express universal human nature. \
\
4. First and second nature must be related so that the second is a natural outgrowth of the first, and so that that in our given makeup is (first) natural which does tend toward an ethically mature second nature. \
}