{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 12. I have argued that virtues are "merely" human, but also argued that that human nature is normative; therefore, the proposition that virtues are normative is deduced from the major premise. There are still problems to be solved; specifically the relation between reason and nature. \
\
The two sorts are what I have called Organic Naturalism and Practical Naturalism. (Julia Annas draws the same distinction in terms of biological and rational.) As we have already seen, virtue ethicists tend to pick one or the other, or vacillate between one and the other, or try to bridge the apparent gap between them. Where they can agree is that somehow human nature, our nature as practical reasoning animals, must have normativity 'built-in' so to speak. When Christopher Toner, for example, draws out same distinction between the kinds of naturalism, he agrees with Hursthouse that the term 'Aristotelian naturalism' "implies that human nature is normative, such that to be morally good is to fulfill one's nature."[@toner2008sorts 221.] \
\
The question is just how to do that. Is human nature just another example of a biological nature, like chimpanzees and dolphins, subject to evaluation by the same patterns of normativity? Or is humanity something quite different, on account of our rational self-awareness and practical agency? \
\
Chris Toner argues that the natural norms must be intrinsically motivating (or practical), they must be intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of that nature (upon reflection, they seem binding, even if they do not mechanically determine one's action); they must be anchored in and express universal human nature; and first and second nature must be related in such a way that the second nature is an outgrowth of the first so that that in our given makeup is (first) natural which does tend toward an ethically mature second nature. \
}