{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 10. Another might object that which properties we pick out as ethically relevant or normative will only be the good ones, but this is the Polyanna Problem. Why those? Is there any justification or is it prejudging a moral judgment?  We should not take the difficulty of discerning which 'natural' impulses and qualities are virtuous and rational as a weakness. It seems rather to me a strength. It allows that "the gods have put sweat between us and virtue." Many people are irrational. Many people are not virtuous. But that is just to say that many people are imperfectly human, and not just by bad luck or misfortune; they are imperfectly actuating the human life form by making bad choices, being ill-informed, being lazy, being greedy. Just as health leads to more health (a healthy organism can eat, digest, and exercise better than its sick counterpart), virtue leads to more virtue (a diligent person is liable to become patient), vice leads to more vice (a lazy person is liable to become impatient). We ought to take care, at the earliest ages, to ensure the zealous cultivation of virtues in ourselves and others.\
12. On the other hand, the Polyanna Problem picks out a real shortcoming in recent discussions of virtue ethics. They focus on virtue rather than vice. Kindism picks out characteristic failures of humanity just as much as excellence. \
\
\
\
Micah Lott calls the "Polyanna Problem".[@lott2012moral]  To see this problem, supposing that the other two objections have been overcome: human norms are discoverable and demonstrable both practical and relevant. Still are such norms merely "protonormative"[@ward2013against, chapter 2.] or fully *ethical*? Are we obligated to fulfill all such norms? Just some? How are they to be distinguished from unethical, vile behaviors also statistically common among human behaviors? Empirically, some acorns become fully grown, mature oaks, but other acorns become stulted, sickly specimens. Most acorns never become anything other than acorns before they disintegrate into dust in the soil.  So statistical majorities will not do the trick. Likewise, norms can be discovered for both good and evil: Some animals protect their young while other animals abandon or even consume their young. Some humans are kind and gentle while others are vicious and cruel.  Anscombe anticipates this worry when she says: \
\
>The search for "norms" might lead someone to look for laws of nature, as if the universe were a legislator; but in the present day this is not likely to lead to good results: it might lead one to eat the weaker according to the laws of nature, but would hardly lead anyone nowadays to notions of justice.[@anscombe1958 14] \
\
Can we move from vague statements such as "human beings are language users" to particular moral statements: 'Human beings make and keep promises'?\
\
The Polyanna Problem is the temptation to wink at the evils of human behavior in the effort to paint a portrait that is falsely full of sweetness and light. Put differently, even if human norms are discoverable, will they be *good*? Will they not be a mixed bag of good and apparently evil norms? Will we not need something else, such as conscience, or divine revelation, over and above these human laws, by which to judge which ones are normative for us?}