{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
McDowell argues that the virtues are various "sensitivities" to the salient facts about how to live. McDowell's theses are that: (1) "The point of engaging in ethical reflection... lies in the interest of the question 'How should one live?'"[@mcdowell1979virtue 331]; \
(2) Virtues are kinds of knowledge and *virtue* is a kind of knowledge; and \
(3) The question of how to live must be approached from "within" a moral outlook and approached "*via* the notion of a virtuous person."[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] Let\'92s examine each of these in turn to uncover McDowell\'92s account of virtue. \
\
The first point is that ethical reflection aims at answering the ever relevant question "How should one live?"[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] We notice that ethical reflection is *reflection* about *practice*. It seems to me that this obvious truth is almost too close to be seen, like one\'92s nose. It is far too often overlooked. We do not *merely* act (like a deer or a dog) nor do we *merely* calculate (like a computer or an angel); we reflect upon what we ought to do, how we ought to live. Such reflection only makes sense concerning issues within my control. Insofar as one cannot but sleep sometimes, the question of whether or not to sleep at all is not an ethical question; it is not in my control. Insofar as one can either stay or go, pursue or avoid, harm or help, such decisions are ethical decisions and the question of how to live is an ethical question. One must decide which larger, longer-term projects to pursue and which objects are worthwhile to obtain; and one must, along the way of these long-term pursuits, decide rather extemporaneously how to react to the vicissitudes of circumstance.  Each of us must decide how to react to the \'93slings and arrows of outrageous fortune.\'94^[*Hamlet* III.1]\
\
\
\
### The Moral Outlook\
\
Recall McDowell's third thesis: The question of how to live must be approached from "within" a moral outlook and approached "*via* the notion of a virtuous person."[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] \
\
McDowell\'92s solution to the problem of the "vertigo" we feel when contemplating the dependence of our rational concept-application on nothing more than our shared form of life is to simply accept that we cannot think from a third-person, detached, \'93sideways on\'94 point of view; we can only think from within our point of view. His main opponent, of course, is the notion that morality can be adduced from an objective third-person sort of view. He says, \'93The cure for the vertigo, then, is to give up on the idea that philosophical thought, about the sorts of practice in question, should be undertaken at some external standpoint, outside our immersion in our familiar forms of life.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 341] This is part of the movement toward his thesis that that virtues are ethical qualities that only make sense \'91from within\'92, that they lend a certain kind of perceptive ability to their bearers. \
\
McDowell points out the familiar case of a discussion or disagreement that end at loggerheads, with both parties asking "But don't you see?" Although it is tempting to want to resolve such loggerheads by appeal to a third-personal point of view standing outside either of our forms of life, McDowell thinks it must be resolved, if at all, from firmly within our form of life. That is not to say that persuasion is not possible. He reassures us that the "Don't you see?" question "can often be supplemented with words aimed at persuasion."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342] Rather, persuasion will consist in "bring[ing] someone to see it as one wants", in one or both parties appreciating reasons they may not have seen before. It sometimes takes efforts to make someone see (to make oneself or others see) "the right way to handle a given situation."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342]\
\
Now, if virtue knowledge is not codifiable then how is it *consistent*? What guarantees that the moral person\'92s behavior is intelligibly the same from case to case? On the one hand, if moral knowledge is rational then it is consistent from case to case and situation to situation; but if, as McDowell has been arguing, both deductive reasoning and practical reasoning are not merely consistent by being like a rule-following machine or computer, how do we explain the virtuous person's reliably correct behavior? Section 5 of the article answers this question by way of Aristotle's practical syllogisms.\
\
The 'practical syllogism' takes the following shape: \
\
1. X is good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. (E.g., it is good to instantiate justice in the classroom).\
2. Z would be X. (E.g., giving everyone a chance to re-take a quiz that was unavailable due to technical problems would be instantiate justice in my classroom.)\
3. Therefore, Z would be good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. \
\
On the strictly deductive logical model, the role of the major premise is to provide rock solid universal ethical principles from which to derive particular moral duties. But McDowell resists this model. On the strictly non-cognitivist model, without universal ethical principles we are left with universal psychological states (consistent desires, plans, values, or norms). McDowell also resists this. On the non-codifiable model, what does the major premise do? Its role, he says, is to state a "certain conception of how to live... [namely] the *virtuous person's conception* of the sort of life a human being should lead."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343. Emphasis added.] It is clear upon reflection that this account is a sort of circular reasoning. For the virtuous person's conception of how to live is itself conditioned by what he called earlier 'the moral outlook'. That conception of how to live, in turn, conditions what particular saliences are noticed (what minor premises) and generates practical conclusions about what is to be done. What kind of life should a human being lead? The answer "cannot be definitively written down."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] Furthermore, "Any attempt to capture it in words will recapitulate the character of the teaching whereby it might be instilled: generalizations will be approximate at best..."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] The upshot of the combination of non-codifiability with a practical syllogistic form is that the virtuous person takes for a rule of life some conception of how to live but that this conception is part of what it means to be a virtuous person. (Hence the vertigo.)\
\
We might wonder why we are bothering about formal syllogistic reasoning at this point. But this way of understanding the practical syllogism *does* do good job of providing a plausible explanation of moral motivation (reasons one might act in some way) and moral behavior (reasons one acted that way). To paraphrase McDowell: "Explanations of judgments about what to do are explanations of actions."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342. Verbatim, he says: "The explanations, so far treated as explanations of judgments about what to do, are equally explanations of actions."] I can explain your behavior by understanding that you were concerned for your friend\'92s welfare and reached out to help. Likewise, you can explain your decision to help by assuring me that you are concerned for your friend\'92s welfare. For McDowell, the general structure of the practical syllogism is useful. He says \'93the rationality of virtue\'85 is not demonstrable from an external standpoint.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 346]\
\
### Two Further Objections\
\
McDowell cites a common objection, familiarly attributed to Hume, that practical reasons by themselves cannot motivate \'97 that they need the presence of a conative mental state (such as a desire) as well. The common judgment is that \'93cognition and volition are distinct.\'94 Surely the virtuous person\'92s behavior is conditioned both by knowledge and their non-cognitive psychological states. In McDowell\'92s example, one is aware that one\'92s friend is in trouble and that the friend is able to be comforted (the cognitive bit) and a desire (or motivation or inclination or settled passion) for helping one\'92s friends (the non-cognitive bit). Surely these two *together* and neither in isolation explains the behavior. \
\
The problem with this objection is that, as McDowell has plausibly argued, an essential component of the awareness that one\'92s friend is in trouble is the very sensitivity that is virtue. The difference between the vicious and virtuous person lies not just in their desires and reactions to what they notice about the world but in the noticing itself. Furthermore, McDowell points out, this non-cognitivist makes use of the deductive model of practical reasoning he has been at pains to deflate. \
\
Perhaps, furthermore, to be rational, a genuine reason must be verifiable from an external, \'93neutral standpoint\'94 open to any rational observer whatsoever. Surely *something*, such as scientific or deductive logical beliefs, are objective in the sense that they look the same to any rational being whatsoever. \
\
Even here, McDowell undermines the objection as based partly in \'93vertigo\'94. It is a \'93craving for a kind of rationality independently demonstrable as such.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 346] He admits that the intelligibility and consistency of the virtuous person\'92s way of life are an \'93orectic state\'94 but not that it is a straightforward desire as much as \'93a conception of how to live.\'94\
\
Although McDowell sees another more \'93subtle non-cognitivism\'94 arising from the ashes, he does not fully develop it. Rather, he says: \
\
>\'93I suspect that its origin is a philistine scientism, probably based on the misleading idea that the right of scientific method to rational acceptance is discernible from a more objective standpoint than that from which we seem to perceive the saliences. A scientistic conception of reality is eminently open to dispute. When we ask the metaphysical question whether reality is what science can find out about, we cannot, without begging the question, restrict the materials for an answer to those which science can countenance.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 346]}