{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
\
### Virtue is Knowledge?\
\
As for the thesis that virtue is a kind of knowledge, McDowell argues that morality is *practical knowledge* (a \'93disposition to act well\'94). Such practical knowledge (and this is the third point) seems to demand "a moral outlook" to act well.[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] To see why it makes sense to conceive of virtue as practical knowledge, suppose that some platitudinous value (say, kindness) is really a virtue. The kind person is reliably kind and is kind *on purpose*. A person who merely happens to be kind or who commits acts of kindness resulting from blind instinct does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. A person who is kind once, or even every now and then, likewise does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. Rather, a kind person is one who is regularly sensitive to a range of reasons for behaving in a particular way. The kind person, McDowell adduces, "has a reliable sensitivity to a certain sort of requirement which situations impose on behavior" and such "deliverances of a reliable sensitivity are cases of knowledge."[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] The kind person *knows* what is called for, is intentional about avoiding cruel or indifferent behavior, and so on. \
\
If kindness is \'93a sort of perceptual capacity\'94, \'93specialized sensitivity\'94 to a particular range of reasons for action (say, the feelings of others), then perhaps the same holds true for other virtues.[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] In fact, McDowell suggests, the notion that virtues are specialized sensitivities \'97 each a kind of knowledge \'97 helps us understand the Socratic notion of the unity of virtue. \
\
These reflections support the notion that this kind of knowledge ("sensitivity to reasons") is necessary for the virtue but not sufficient. For it might be that one is sensitive to what another would feel but still fail to act rightly. Why? Perhaps, like the overindulgent parent, one is *too* sensitive to the feelings of the child or *not sensitive enough* to other considerations, like the child\'92s health or (McDowell\'92s example) fairness. The virtuous person is sensitive to a whole range of reasons; since reason A and reason B might commend different acts, part of virtue must be the meta-cognitive capacity to reflect upon all those reasons available to one, to rank and order them. \
\
McDowell\'92s \'93preliminary case\'94 that virtue is knowledge is that the \'93requirement imposed by the situation\'85 must exhaust his reason for acting as he does.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] It would disqualify the act as a candidate for an example of kindness if the agent performed it *because* it was kind *and because good repute was likely to follow*. If we run the same calculus on each particular virtue, we can hypothesize that virtuous agents\'92 behavior in each case is explained by their sensitivity to those particular kinds of reasons. In turn, their behavior in general (when virtuous) is explained by their sensitivity in general. He concludes, \'93thus the particular virtues are not a batch of Independent sensitivities. Rather, we use the concepts of the particular virtues to mark similarities and dissimilarities among the manifestations of a single sensitivity which is what virtue, in general, is: an ability to recognize requirements which situations impose on one's behavior. It is a single complex sensitivity of the sort which we are aiming to instill when we aim to inculcate a moral outlook.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 333]\
\
### Two Objections\
\
One objection to the view that virtue is that a \'93single complex sensitivity\'94 to requirements upon one\'92s behavior arises from considerations of the internalism/externalism debate regarding moral motivation. Suppose two persons in the same situation are equipped with identical perceptual capacities and so sensitive to the same range of reasons for action, but only one of them does the right thing. If such a supposed situation were to obtain, it would disconfirm McDowell\'92s conclusion. But one man\'92s *modus ponens* is another man\'92s *modus tollens.* If virtue is to be identified with a single complex sensitivity, then a supposed situation in which two persons perceive a situation and its practical requirements identically but act differently cannot obtain.[@mcdowell1979virtue 333] Socrates took this line. But McDowell suggests we look to Aristotle.  Aristotle allowed that \'93appreciation of what [a virtuous person] observes is clouded, or unfocused, by the impact of a desire to do otherwise.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 334] The point of such an allowances is that the break between the sensitivity to reasons (which is virtue) and a resultant wrong action occurs when other psychological factors interfere. What interference? McDowell mentions desires and also a \'93distortion in one\'92s appreciation\'94 of the relevant reasons.[@mcdowell1979virtue 334]\
\
A second possible objection McDowell draws from Donald Davidson. Davidson argues to the effect that a person might fail to perform the resultant right action even without such interfering factors. McDowell responds that the point is true, but it is not an objection. Aristotle\'92s account of continence details that continence is not a virtue. Continence is better than incontinence, but not as good as virtue. The continent person is able to perform the right action because he recognizes it as right, *despite* countervailing pressures (from desires, say) to do the wrong action. Since a fully developed virtue definitionally includes having the proper motivation as well, continence is only needed in the absence of a fully developed virtue. Furthermore, the virtuous person is not always one who \'93balances\'94 reasons for X against countervailing reasons for Y. The virtuous person is the one for whom simply identifying a reason (\'93in this situation, courage requires that I run into danger\'94) silences countervailing reasons. The virtuous persons sees the danger (and perhaps feels rightly apprehensive) but also sees that courage in the face of this danger is required; the latter perception, according to McDowell, \'93silences\'94 other pressures.[@mcdowell1979virtue 335] The merely continent person has to \'93weigh\'94 reasons; the virtuous person fluently and instantly *acts* on the best reason.\
\
### Is virtue-knowledge *codifiable*?\
\
McDowell considers the objection that if virtue is knowledge, \'91knowing-what-to-do\'92 must be codifiable in propositional form. But \'91knowing-what-to-do\'92 is not codifiable, so virtue must not be knowledge. On this objection,  the virtuous person enjoys knowledge of one or a few universal ethical precepts and reliably calculates the application of those principles to individual occasions. The virtuous person\'92s ethical arguments \'93take the form of a \'91practical syllogism\'92\'94 wherein the universal proposition is the major premise and the \'93relevant particular knowledge\'94 is a minor premise, while the issuing conclusion is the judgment of \'93what is to be done.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 336] Furthermore, on this objection, the defender of Humean moral psychology can keep the identification of relevant particular knowledge with a \'93minor premise\'94 but substitute the proposed major premise (a proposition such as \'93It is always good to be courageous\'94) with a non-cognitive desire or commitment (such as \'93*I want* to be courageous\'94 or \'93Be courageous!\'94). Now, they can explain how a virtuous person and non-virtuous person can both perceive a situation identically but fail to perform the same action with reference to their different desires or commitments. \
\
The problem with this objection, McDowell thinks, is not so much a problem with our moral theory but a problem with our conception of rationality. The problem stems from a \'93deep-rooted prejudice\'94 that rationality is a rule-following procedure. If rationality is a rule-following procedure, then it follows that *either* practical rationality and morality are likewise rule-following procedures *or* that practical rationality and morality is not, ultimately, sufficiently *rational*.  Some philosophers (often followers of Hume but not necessarily Hume himself) think that morality is a not rational domain but a domain of sentiments, desires, commitments, approvals, and so on. Other philosophers (often followers of Kant) think that morality is a rational domain and hence must be a matter of identifying first principles and \'93applying\'94 them to particular situations. But what they share in common is a belief that \'93rationality must be explicable in terms of being guided by a formulable universal principle.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] This common belief McDowell wishes to refute. [In @macintyre1984does. MacIntyre argues a similar point. In this essay, he denies the assumption that normative ethical rules can be derived from universal ethical principles the way we \'93apply\'94 universal logical truths to particular logical conclusions via a middle term.]  \
\
McDowell\'92s discussion here (drawing on Wittgenstein and others) is hard to follow. The point seems to be that even apparently obvious cases where the rational thing to do is to follow an objective rule (say, by extending a series of numbers) turn out to be cases of a much messier process in which there is no such objective rule by appeal to which we can explain rational thoughts or behaviors. If Bob instructs Charlie to \'93add 2\'94 to a number and continue applying the rule indefinitely, we tend to be confident Charlie will produce \'932, 4, 6, 8,\'94 etc., which will \'93churn out the appropriate behavior with the sort of reliability which a physical mechanism, say a piece of clockwork, might have.\'94 We postulate a \'93psychological mechanism, underlying his behavior, by an inference analogous to that whereby one might hypothesize a physical structure underlying the observable motions of some inanimate object.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] The \'93ground and nature of our confidence\'94 that we will reliably apply rules is not but a common form of life. The \'91form of life\'92 is a term of art here from Wittgenstein (and quoted with approval from Stanley Cavell) that refers to that difficult-to-define process by which we learn how reliably to use words in our native language, how to make exclamations like a pained \'93ow!\'94 or an excited \'93ooh!\'94, when to laugh at jokes, and when to cry in pity. Our shared rationality, McDowell suggests, is not grounded in \'93external\'94 objective rules but in a shared form of life or what he calls a \'93congruence of subjectivities\'94.[@mcdowell1979virtue 339] McDowell admits this is a disconcerting hypothesis; it induces \'93vertigo.\'94 But, our response to such vertigo should not be to embrace a \'93consoling myth\'94. That myth he says is the two notions that (a) rule-following is a psychological mechanism that \'97 absent mistakes \'97 guarantees consistency, and that there exist objective facts of the matter over and above the congruence of subjectivities. If we abandon these two notions and embrace the model of deductive rationality as grounded only in our intersubjective form of life, then the corresponding model of practical rationality will become tenable. \
\
### The Moral Outlook\
\
Recall McDowell's third thesis: The question of how to live must be approached from "within" a moral outlook and approached "*via* the notion of a virtuous person."[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] \
\
McDowell\'92s solution to the problem of the "vertigo" we feel when contemplating the dependence of our rational concept-application on nothing more than our shared form of life is to simply accept that we cannot think from a third-person, detached, \'93sideways on\'94 point of view; we can only think from within our point of view. His main opponent, of course, is the notion that morality can be adduced from an objective third-person sort of view. He says, \'93The cure for the vertigo, then, is to give up on the idea that philosophical thought, about the sorts of practice in question, should be undertaken at some external standpoint, outside our immersion in our familiar forms of life.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 341] This is part of the movement toward his thesis that that virtues are ethical qualities that only make sense \'91from within\'92, that they lend a certain kind of perceptive ability to their bearers. \
\
McDowell points out the familiar case of a discussion or disagreement that end at loggerheads, with both parties asking "But don't you see?" Although it is tempting to want to resolve such loggerheads by appeal to a third-personal point of view standing outside either of our forms of life, McDowell thinks it must be resolved, if at all, from firmly within our form of life. That is not to say that persuasion is not possible. He reassures us that the "Don't you see?" question "can often be supplemented with words aimed at persuasion."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342] Rather, persuasion will consist in "bring[ing] someone to see it as one wants", in one or both parties appreciating reasons they may not have seen before. It sometimes takes efforts to make someone see (to make oneself or others see) "the right way to handle a given situation."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342]\
\
Now, if virtue knowledge is not codifiable then how is it *consistent*? What guarantees that the moral person\'92s behavior is intelligibly the same from case to case? On the one hand, if moral knowledge is rational then it is consistent from case to case and situation to situation; but if, as McDowell has been arguing, both deductive reasoning and practical reasoning are not merely consistent by being like a rule-following machine or computer, how do we explain the virtuous person's reliably correct behavior? Section 5 of the article answers this question by way of Aristotle's practical syllogisms.\
\
The 'practical syllogism' takes the following shape: \
\
1. X is good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. (E.g., it is good to instantiate justice in the classroom).\
2. Z would be X. (E.g., giving everyone a chance to re-take a quiz that was unavailable due to technical problems would be instantiate justice in my classroom.)\
3. Therefore, Z would be good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. \
\
On the strictly deductive logical model, the role of the major premise is to provide rock solid universal ethical principles from which to derive particular moral duties. But McDowell resists this model. On the strictly non-cognitivist model, without universal ethical principles we are left with universal psychological states (consistent desires, plans, values, or norms). McDowell also resists this. On the non-codifiable model, what does the major premise do? Its role, he says, is to state a "certain conception of how to live... [namely] the *virtuous person's conception* of the sort of life a human being should lead."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343. Emphasis added.] It is clear upon reflection that this account is a sort of circular reasoning. For the virtuous person's conception of how to live is itself conditioned by what he called earlier 'the moral outlook'. That conception of how to live, in turn, conditions what particular saliences are noticed (what minor premises) and generates practical conclusions about what is to be done. What kind of life should a human being lead? The answer "cannot be definitively written down."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] Furthermore, "Any attempt to capture it in words will recapitulate the character of the teaching whereby it might be instilled: generalizations will be approximate at best..."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] The upshot of the combination of non-codifiability with a practical syllogistic form is that the virtuous person takes for a rule of life some conception of how to live but that this conception is part of what it means to be a virtuous person. (Hence the vertigo.)\
\
We might wonder why we are bothering about formal syllogistic reasoning at this point. But this way of understanding the practical syllogism *does* do good job of providing a plausible explanation of moral motivation (reasons one might act in some way) and moral behavior (reasons one acted that way). To paraphrase McDowell: "Explanations of judgments about what to do are explanations of actions."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342. Verbatim, he says: "The explanations, so far treated as explanations of judgments about what to do, are equally explanations of actions."] I can explain your behavior by understanding that you were concerned for your friend\'92s welfare and reached out to help. Likewise, you can explain your decision to help by assuring me that you are concerned for your friend\'92s welfare. For McDowell, the general structure of the practical syllogism is useful. He says \'93the rationality of virtue\'85 is not demonstrable from an external standpoint.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 346]\
\
### Two Further Objections\
\
McDowell cites a common objection, familiarly attributed to Hume, that practical reasons by themselves cannot motivate \'97 that they need the presence of a conative mental state (such as a desire) as well. The common judgment is that \'93cognition and volition are distinct.\'94 Surely the virtuous person\'92s behavior is conditioned both by knowledge and their non-cognitive psychological states. In McDowell\'92s example, one is aware that one\'92s friend is in trouble and that the friend is able to be comforted (the cognitive bit) and a desire (or motivation or inclination or settled passion) for helping one\'92s friends (the non-cognitive bit). Surely these two *together* and neither in isolation explains the behavior. \
\
The problem with this objection is that, as McDowell has plausibly argued, an essential component of the awareness that one\'92s friend is in trouble is the very sensitivity that is virtue. The difference between the vicious and virtuous person lies not just in their desires and reactions to what they notice about the world but in the noticing itself. Furthermore, McDowell points out, this non-cognitivist makes use of the deductive model of practical reasoning he has been at pains to deflate. \
\
Perhaps, furthermore, to be rational, a genuine reason must be verifiable from an external, \'93neutral standpoint\'94 open to any rational observer whatsoever. Surely *something*, such as scientific or deductive logical beliefs, are objective in the sense that they look the same to any rational being whatsoever. \
\
Even here, McDowell undermines the objection as based partly in \'93vertigo\'94. It is a \'93craving for a kind of rationality independently demonstrable as such.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 346] He admits that the intelligibility and consistency of the virtuous person\'92s way of life are an \'93orectic state\'94 but not that it is a straightforward desire as much as \'93a conception of how to live.\'94\
\
Although McDowell sees another more \'93subtle non-cognitivism\'94 arising from the ashes, he does not fully develop it. Rather, he says: \
\
>\'93I suspect that its origin is a philistine scientism, probably based on the misleading idea that the right of scientific method to rational acceptance is discernible from a more objective standpoint than that from which we seem to perceive the saliences. A scientistic conception of reality is eminently open to dispute. When we ask the metaphysical question whether reality is what science can find out about, we cannot, without begging the question, restrict the materials for an answer to those which science can countenance.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 346]\
\
\
### Virtue is Knowledge?\
\
As for the thesis that virtue is a kind of knowledge, McDowell argues that morality is *practical knowledge* (a \'93disposition to act well\'94). Such practical knowledge (and this is the third point) seems to demand "a moral outlook" to act well.[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] To see why it makes sense to conceive of virtue as practical knowledge, suppose that some platitudinous value (say, kindness) is really a virtue. The kind person is reliably kind and is kind *on purpose*. A person who merely happens to be kind or who commits acts of kindness resulting from blind instinct does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. A person who is kind once, or even every now and then, likewise does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. Rather, a kind person is one who is regularly sensitive to a range of reasons for behaving in a particular way. The kind person, McDowell adduces, "has a reliable sensitivity to a certain sort of requirement which situations impose on behavior" and such "deliverances of a reliable sensitivity are cases of knowledge."[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] The kind person *knows* what is called for, is intentional about avoiding cruel or indifferent behavior, and so on. \
\
If kindness is \'93a sort of perceptual capacity\'94, \'93specialized sensitivity\'94 to a particular range of reasons for action (say, the feelings of others), then perhaps the same holds true for other virtues.[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] In fact, McDowell suggests, the notion that virtues are specialized sensitivities \'97 each a kind of knowledge \'97 helps us understand the Socratic notion of the unity of virtue. \
\
These reflections support the notion that this kind of knowledge ("sensitivity to reasons") is necessary for the virtue but not sufficient. For it might be that one is sensitive to what another would feel but still fail to act rightly. Why? Perhaps, like the overindulgent parent, one is *too* sensitive to the feelings of the child or *not sensitive enough* to other considerations, like the child\'92s health or (McDowell\'92s example) fairness. The virtuous person is sensitive to a whole range of reasons; since reason A and reason B might commend different acts, part of virtue must be the meta-cognitive capacity to reflect upon all those reasons available to one, to rank and order them. \
\
McDowell\'92s \'93preliminary case\'94 that virtue is knowledge is that the \'93requirement imposed by the situation\'85 must exhaust his reason for acting as he does.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] It would disqualify the act as a candidate for an example of kindness if the agent performed it *because* it was kind *and because good repute was likely to follow*. If we run the same calculus on each particular virtue, we can hypothesize that virtuous agents\'92 behavior in each case is explained by their sensitivity to those particular kinds of reasons. In turn, their behavior in general (when virtuous) is explained by their sensitivity in general. He concludes, \'93thus the particular virtues are not a batch of Independent sensitivities. Rather, we use the concepts of the particular virtues to mark similarities and dissimilarities among the manifestations of a single sensitivity which is what virtue, in general, is: an ability to recognize requirements which situations impose on one's behavior. It is a single complex sensitivity of the sort which we are aiming to instill when we aim to inculcate a moral outlook.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 333]\
\
### Two Objections\
\
One objection to the view that virtue is that a \'93single complex sensitivity\'94 to requirements upon one\'92s behavior arises from considerations of the internalism/externalism debate regarding moral motivation. Suppose two persons in the same situation are equipped with identical perceptual capacities and so sensitive to the same range of reasons for action, but only one of them does the right thing. If such a supposed situation were to obtain, it would disconfirm McDowell\'92s conclusion. But one man\'92s *modus ponens* is another man\'92s *modus tollens.* If virtue is to be identified with a single complex sensitivity, then a supposed situation in which two persons perceive a situation and its practical requirements identically but act differently cannot obtain.[@mcdowell1979virtue 333] Socrates took this line. But McDowell suggests we look to Aristotle.  Aristotle allowed that \'93appreciation of what [a virtuous person] observes is clouded, or unfocused, by the impact of a desire to do otherwise.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 334] The point of such an allowances is that the break between the sensitivity to reasons (which is virtue) and a resultant wrong action occurs when other psychological factors interfere. What interference? McDowell mentions desires and also a \'93distortion in one\'92s appreciation\'94 of the relevant reasons.[@mcdowell1979virtue 334]\
\
A second possible objection McDowell draws from Donald Davidson. Davidson argues to the effect that a person might fail to perform the resultant right action even without such interfering factors. McDowell responds that the point is true, but it is not an objection. Aristotle\'92s account of continence details that continence is not a virtue. Continence is better than incontinence, but not as good as virtue. The continent person is able to perform the right action because he recognizes it as right, *despite* countervailing pressures (from desires, say) to do the wrong action. Since a fully developed virtue definitionally includes having the proper motivation as well, continence is only needed in the absence of a fully developed virtue. Furthermore, the virtuous person is not always one who \'93balances\'94 reasons for X against countervailing reasons for Y. The virtuous person is the one for whom simply identifying a reason (\'93in this situation, courage requires that I run into danger\'94) silences countervailing reasons. The virtuous persons sees the danger (and perhaps feels rightly apprehensive) but also sees that courage in the face of this danger is required; the latter perception, according to McDowell, \'93silences\'94 other pressures.[@mcdowell1979virtue 335] The merely continent person has to \'93weigh\'94 reasons; the virtuous person fluently and instantly *acts* on the best reason.\
\
### Is virtue-knowledge *codifiable*?\
\
McDowell considers the objection that if virtue is knowledge, \'91knowing-what-to-do\'92 must be codifiable in propositional form. But \'91knowing-what-to-do\'92 is not codifiable, so virtue must not be knowledge. On this objection,  the virtuous person enjoys knowledge of one or a few universal ethical precepts and reliably calculates the application of those principles to individual occasions. The virtuous person\'92s ethical arguments \'93take the form of a \'91practical syllogism\'92\'94 wherein the universal proposition is the major premise and the \'93relevant particular knowledge\'94 is a minor premise, while the issuing conclusion is the judgment of \'93what is to be done.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 336] Furthermore, on this objection, the defender of Humean moral psychology can keep the identification of relevant particular knowledge with a \'93minor premise\'94 but substitute the proposed major premise (a proposition such as \'93It is always good to be courageous\'94) with a non-cognitive desire or commitment (such as \'93*I want* to be courageous\'94 or \'93Be courageous!\'94). Now, they can explain how a virtuous person and non-virtuous person can both perceive a situation identically but fail to perform the same action with reference to their different desires or commitments. \
\
The problem with this objection, McDowell thinks, is not so much a problem with our moral theory but a problem with our conception of rationality. The problem stems from a \'93deep-rooted prejudice\'94 that rationality is a rule-following procedure. If rationality is a rule-following procedure, then it follows that *either* practical rationality and morality are likewise rule-following procedures *or* that practical rationality and morality is not, ultimately, sufficiently *rational*.  Some philosophers (often followers of Hume but not necessarily Hume himself) think that morality is a not rational domain but a domain of sentiments, desires, commitments, approvals, and so on. Other philosophers (often followers of Kant) think that morality is a rational domain and hence must be a matter of identifying first principles and \'93applying\'94 them to particular situations. But what they share in common is a belief that \'93rationality must be explicable in terms of being guided by a formulable universal principle.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] This common belief McDowell wishes to refute. [In @macintyre1984does. MacIntyre argues a similar point. In this essay, he denies the assumption that normative ethical rules can be derived from universal ethical principles the way we \'93apply\'94 universal logical truths to particular logical conclusions via a middle term.]  \
\
McDowell\'92s discussion here (drawing on Wittgenstein and others) is hard to follow. The point seems to be that even apparently obvious cases where the rational thing to do is to follow an objective rule (say, by extending a series of numbers) turn out to be cases of a much messier process in which there is no such objective rule by appeal to which we can explain rational thoughts or behaviors. If Bob instructs Charlie to \'93add 2\'94 to a number and continue applying the rule indefinitely, we tend to be confident Charlie will produce \'932, 4, 6, 8,\'94 etc., which will \'93churn out the appropriate behavior with the sort of reliability which a physical mechanism, say a piece of clockwork, might have.\'94 We postulate a \'93psychological mechanism, underlying his behavior, by an inference analogous to that whereby one might hypothesize a physical structure underlying the observable motions of some inanimate object.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] The \'93ground and nature of our confidence\'94 that we will reliably apply rules is not but a common form of life. The \'91form of life\'92 is a term of art here from Wittgenstein (and quoted with approval from Stanley Cavell) that refers to that difficult-to-define process by which we learn how reliably to use words in our native language, how to make exclamations like a pained \'93ow!\'94 or an excited \'93ooh!\'94, when to laugh at jokes, and when to cry in pity. Our shared rationality, McDowell suggests, is not grounded in \'93external\'94 objective rules but in a shared form of life or what he calls a \'93congruence of subjectivities\'94.[@mcdowell1979virtue 339] McDowell admits this is a disconcerting hypothesis; it induces \'93vertigo.\'94 But, our response to such vertigo should not be to embrace a \'93consoling myth\'94. That myth he says is the two notions that (a) rule-following is a psychological mechanism that \'97 absent mistakes \'97 guarantees consistency, and that there exist objective facts of the matter over and above the congruence of subjectivities. If we abandon these two notions and embrace the model of deductive rationality as grounded only in our intersubjective form of life, then the corresponding model of practical rationality will become tenable. }