{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red53\green53\blue53;\red220\green161\blue13;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{hyphen\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8259 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{check\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u10003 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid5}
{\list\listtemplateid6\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid501\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid6}
{\list\listtemplateid7\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid601\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid7}
{\list\listtemplateid8\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid701\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid8}
{\list\listtemplateid9\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid801\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid9}
{\list\listtemplateid10\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid901\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid10}
{\list\listtemplateid11\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1001\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid11}
{\list\listtemplateid12\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1101\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid12}
{\list\listtemplateid13\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1201\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid13}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}{\listoverride\listid6\listoverridecount0\ls6}{\listoverride\listid7\listoverridecount0\ls7}{\listoverride\listid8\listoverridecount0\ls8}{\listoverride\listid9\listoverridecount0\ls9}{\listoverride\listid10\listoverridecount0\ls10}{\listoverride\listid11\listoverridecount0\ls11}{\listoverride\listid12\listoverridecount0\ls12}{\listoverride\listid13\listoverridecount0\ls13}}
\deftab560
\pard\pardeftab560\sa40\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs28 \cf2 Dissertation\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0\fs24 \cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \'93Practical reason is the movement of thought towards, rather than away from, material particulars. As I shall argue in what follows, practical reasoning is a movement from general knowledge of what is good and how to live, towards the production of the kind of life that is essentially characterized by such knowledge. When it is done well, what is understood is the same as what is produced: human form or human life.\'94[@frey 2]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2  \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \'93The practical order is not essentially the order of reality and truth, but the order of action and the good. It is not the order of the explanation of form, but the order of the exemplification or realization of form.\'94 [@frey 2]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 ======\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Liberalism, which began as an appeal to alleged principles of shared rationality against what was felt to be the tyranny of tradition, has itself been transformed into a tradition whose continuities are partly defined by the interminability of the debate over such principles. An interminability which was from the standpoint of an earlier liberalism a grave defect to be remedied as soon as possible has become, in the eyes of some liberals at least, a kind of virtue.[@macintyre1992whose 335]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Hypocrites are humorous, especially when they do not realize their own hypocrisy. \
\
The humorous observation MacIntyre makes is that the occupant of the liberal tradition is smugly critical of the old religious and philosophical controversies which endlessly subdivided and could not be resolved to consensus by any agreed upon method and -- at the same time -- embroiled in a rational and scientific controversies which endlessly subdivide and cannot be resolved to consensus by any agreed upon method. \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 ====\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 E.O. Wilson suggested that \'93the time has come for ethics to be removed temporarily from the hands of the philosophers and biologicized\'94 (Wilson 1975, 562). \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \'93While neo-Darwinian evolutionary theory does soundly reject any appeal to teleology in the process of evolution itself, there is a large literature in contemporary philosophy of biology defending the legitimacy of employing teleological concepts in connection with adaptations.\'94[@sepmoralitybiology]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \'93If, however, natural functions and ends in living things are structured by special relations established through the process of evolution through natural selection, i.e., non-incidental relations between traits and a special subset of their effects that figured into the selection process, then natural teleology will not ultimately or generally be about the welfare or flourishing of organisms (FitzPatrick 2000).\'94\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Read Fitzpatrick\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 No change should be there is no change\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \
\
=========Chapter 4==========\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 He refers to Aristotle an view should be he refers to an Aristotelian view.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Fix Mickie to JL Mackie or make consistent\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 McDowell thinks some things don't merit responses-- but he himself gives an example with danger.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
this a lockean doctrine. should be this is a lockean doctrine.\
\
The whole McDowell discussion is choppy. There is repetition when I say \'93it may make sense to step back and make the contextual point\'94. First make the point, then step back and explain it. Then return to the point.\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Quine science itself teaches blah blah blah-- pick on Quine.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
Connect Macintyre's assertion that we are dependent rational animals, with the capacities of animality, and the capacities of rationality.\
\
\
Remove repetition on toners for  criteria.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 For example, microbial organisms occupying the human body especially the stomach intestines and other parts of the digestive system, outweigh the number of brain cells in the average adult human brain.\
\
Humans and other mammals could not survive on the earth without the number of trees in the global ecosystem. Trees constitute about 90% of the biomass on the planet. Bracket citation.\
\
Even seemingly incidental organisms are essential for human life. those that are not central in any direct way to human life or human endeavors, such as ocean plankton, form the base of the food chain. If by some catastrophe all of the ocean plankton were destroyed, or a sufficient percentage of it, the entire ecosystem would eventually collapse, as fish died birds that feed on the fish died, plants and other animals that depend on those birds died, and eventually human farm animals died.\
\
The order of objective value, although I shall not use the phrase often, the order of objective value is the order of biological life.\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 ---\
Chapter 4\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
.\
\
Attempt to cite our nature.\
\
say a bit more about morality immorality prison justice system.\
\
Argue that being animal, we are mortal. All organic life is more toll.\
\
Mention chromosomal disorders," a medical textbook. \
\
The difference of human speech is not obvious to infant humans, who learned by imitation words just as well as they learn tweets barks and growls. \
\
Mention religion earlier.\
\
Put the hall Dane quote and all the speech paragraphs together, earlier when I compare rationality to animality.\
\
I preferred to make it indelibly clear and explicit that human nature is not to be rational but to be practically rational, because all people of all cultures and of all intelligence quotient's engage in practical reasoning and deliberation where only a relative minority engage in that kind of abstract reflection that characterizes science, theology, mathematics, metaphysics, ethics, and so on. \
\
Morning delete delete last two words. Practical reason reason. Try to introduce those together.\
\
Rationality practical practical action fund this is a beauty scientific this is not. Save this comment for a more appropriate setting. Also put Thompson on the na\'efve view of action, and Anscot\
\
I need a fuller discussion of potentiality and maturity. Russell misunderstands the nature of generics. If it's the alien anthropologist where to study 12-year-olds and come to all sorts of conclusions about humanity in general, their conclusions would be a week since their sample with the week. Feeling anthropologist would need to look at but sure human beings 25 to 55. Younger than that it would noticed that certain behaviors and lack of brain development make for uncharacteristic behavior. Jan that they would notice illness people slowing down,. Similarly they would have to find some way to differentiate between the people in prison and the people who are running art galleries.\
\
There is an objection to the very notion of a nature. Which is really a reprisal have an objection from the last semester question.\
\
YouTube who exemplifies the same nature of being a potential he practical rational animal. Not Plural.\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 The couch  potato relieves himself.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\
\
\
The Bernard Williams "needs to be strengthened. Trimmed at the front. I think there are some typos.\
\
Chapter 4. This is consistent with John McDowells solution on mind-body problem, there some repetition there\
\
There is a repetition about McDowells fundamental problem or solution to the mind-body problem\
\
Before I defend my own foot version. Change that because I have already defend. Also there was another error right before that.\
\
We need to assume should be we need not soon.\
\
He has asserted but not earned the conceptual rights to his conception of the church. Should say but has not burned the conceptual rights to his definition of nature.\
\
Instead of saying resolve the sticky issue if you Leeshan, say clean up.\
\
Where as a row of trees on the boardwalk is or not. Whereas formal sciences such as math mathematics calculus geometry are not on.\
\
Intelligent intervention from man or not.\
\
In a highly interesting Plato has the Athenian stranger reject this definition of nature.\
\
Restricted naturalists when they defined their own view has naturalism, simply banking question.\
\
Unrestricted naturalism therefore has this great attraction, that one can win the war by bowing out of the war. One can embrace both sides of matter and form in a synoptic view. Unrestricted naturalism however has this great cost, one can no longer exclude ones opponents as non-naturalists. One cannot called one's opponent's supernaturalist a, etc. . That kind of rhetoric is the kind of rhetoric that the restricted conception of nature empiricist can use to beg the question against his opponents, empirical triumphalism, unearned moral superiority that scoffs at all those who don't see that I am right because I am right.\
\
McDowell has rejected the both restriction restricted conceptions of nature, therefore has chosen the unrestricted definition of nature by default. But then he explicitly project the unrestricted conception of nature.  Perhaps he means that nature itself is a Mistry but even then we cannot say in advance if the contents of. Bucks are indeed a Mistry then we cannot exclude in advance any hypotheses about what's in the box.\
\
This is the importance of my initial stipulation of methodological agnosticism. McDowelleian relaxed naturalism is incompatible with dogmatic atheism. It is only compatible with agnosticism, or theism.\
\
McDowell Rejects the restricted conception of nature offered by materialism. He even rejects the equation of this picture with "science". Maybe I can remove the part about aggressive materialism and how physicalism a satisfying at the very beginning of the dissertation and put it here.\
\
I think maybe this chapter should be it's own chapter. How would that work?\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
McDowelleian nature is both restricted and unrestricted . It is in a word, incoherent.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
The dualism into which McDowell unwitting calls, should be unwittingly.\
\
\
There's a word missing when I talk about what is good for my family to earn less highway Joe's. In chapter 6 virtue and reason.\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2  Widmeyer the wisdom in the moderation and the wisdom in the Kerge. Courage.\
\
But the second response to the worry that when this be other completely versus amount virtuous, is that we do it my personal purchase peoples. Remarkably virtuous people\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
Introduce John McDowells virtue and the reason essay. Right now it just says let's look at John McTell.\
\
Draw the connection between McDowells sensitivity and first house multi track.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 ==========\
Scientific ethics conjures a range of images , not all of them good.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 That we should make ethics continuous with science doesn't mean, in advance or automatically, that we should reduce ethics to a mere descriptive, debunked version of its former glory.\
\
That would be to assume a narrow definition of science and cram humanity into it. We can allow a full and robust vision of our own humanity and assume a definition of science broad enough to contain all of it.\
\
It might mean that we should expand science to be more humane, fruitful, value laden, and glorious than even it has ever been.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >And there is indeed much in Kant to suggest that, although he shares with Aristotle the view that we have not just one, but two principles of movement, in other respects his philosophical psychology is Humean. He seems committed to the view that our emotions or inclinations are no part of our rationality. They come from the non\uc0\u8208 rational, animal side of our nature; if they happen to prompt us to act in accordance with the judgements of reason about what ought to be done we are lucky; if they incline us against them we find life difficult, but their prompting us in the right direction is no mark or indication of their rationality. The emotions are not rational in any way.[@hursthouse1998virtue 109]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
>How very unlike the other animals human beings are when they endure agony, and risk their lives, for justice and truth, or are terrified by the prospect of university examinations; when they are ready to die for glory, but tremble at the prospect of humiliation. The emotion that in the other animals is essentially connected to physical self\uc0\u8208 preservation or preservation of the species can be transformed in human beings into an emotion connected with the preservation of what is 
\i best
\i0 , most worth preserving, in us and our species. And the correctness (or incorrectness) of our view of that is an aspect of our rationality.[@hursthouse1998virtue 111]\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >Another fault of Williams's predecessors and ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.oxfordscholarship.com.ezproxy.uky.edu/view/10.1093/0199247994.001.0001/acprof-9780199247998-bibliography-1#acprof-9780199247998-bibItem-124"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 1965}}) contemporaries was that, though concentrating on \'91the most general features of .\'a0.\'a0. evaluative language\'92, they failed to think about the fact that such language has to be taught, and thereby failed to think about moral education and upbringing. We are taught to use sentences which contain the words (equivalent to) \'91good\'92 and \'91evil\'92 and their cognates and species from a very early age, at the same time as we are taught how to conduct ourselves. And a central aspect of this teaching is the training of the emotions.[@hursthouse1998virtue 113]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >For the kind of discriminating detail which makes the vague remark into a plausible and illuminating thesis, the best source is still Aquinas, not just in 
\i Summa Theologiae
\i0  Ia2ae (QQ. 22\'9630) on \'91The Emotions\'92, but all through IIa2ae (QQ. 1\'96189) on hope, fear, despair, charity (
\i caritas
\i0 ), joy, hatred, 
\i accidie
\i0 , envy, anger, curiosity, etc. Descartes, in 
\i The Passions of the Soul
\i0 , gives a rather watered\uc0\u8208 down but still instructive version.[@hursthouse1998virtue chapter 5, footnote 2]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >It is, I think, true, that where Aristotle, and thereby the Aristotelians, have an edge over Kant (and, indeed, Hume) with respect to the moral significance of the emotions is in the account Aristotle gives us of human rationality, an account that allows the emotions to participate in reason and thereby play their proper role in the specification of full virtue. Much modern moral philosophy, deontological and utilitarian, has followed Kant, or Hume, rather than Aristotle, on human rationality, and thereby still suffers from the fault to which Anscombe drew attention back in 1958\'97it lacks \'91an adequate philosophy of psychology\'92.[@hursthouse1998virtue 119.]\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 -At the risk hidebound air. At the risk of hidebound error\
-add in the first section section about moral realism. Site the book The moral realism is a normative ethical position.  Site Maki who says that when you realize there is no objective value you feel like life is not worth living and nothing is worth doing. There's some clue hear that practical action is definitionally or conceptually constituted by a value judgment, or by and evaluate his attitude.\
-chapter 4: part of task should be part of our task.\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	} In footnote reword that phrase so it is not a question. Are we born from other humans?\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}Put  Second Hearst house Hursthouse earlier with foots quote about rationality.\
{\listtext	\uc0\u8259 	}The irrelevance objection repeats it self like seven times. Synthesize and make a comment that this objection is so important to take care to put it in a couple of different ways.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 The point I take it, chapter 4. Reduce or remove repetition.\
Put the paragraph of examples about we can imagine people doing what comes natural he somewhere else, in the social teleology section maybe?\
\
Dependence is as close to use "should be dependence is as close to us\
\
Change transition, and rational or rather the exception, not\
\
To discuss genetic disorder etc. Should be followed immediately by intentional actualization and just possession of a nature. Dispossession. \
\
Also delete or relocate the sentence about the old classificatory Schey\
\
Innocent babies born without brains are still potentially rational since they are human beings, and recognizably so \'96 they are not Eagles or Stardust are weeping Willows. They are simply defective in that brain of the parts of the brain necessary for the actuation of humor human form tragically did not arise. Thankfully we have a clean exclamation for this, and generics the generics are formal true is compatible with individual exceptions. Generics are not crassly empirical statistical universal judgments\
\
This helps us to rebut a playful job quote should be this helps us to Perry playful Jeff. Use a fencing metaphor. Explain that Russell meant we are driven by emotion, we are often irrational, in that we do things that are not good for us, we do things we know we are not good for us. We are forgetful, we neglect or better angels, etc. Which is all true. That most of us do not actualizer formants is sad but compatible with the truth of the generic. Maybe for instance that political context or natural following this incest real soon keep us from becoming who we truly are.\
\
Peter singer is someone who is not an evil person but whose philosophical thinking has falling into this mistake. \
\
Pre born human fetuses... Regardless of the niceties of personhood.\
\
Rephrase the tragedy bit to say we understand that they are in process mid development etc\
\
I say this is Fitzpatrick's worry. But that line needs to come before the response.\
\
Can I construct an analytical outline now?\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	1.	}Nature is normative, there are natural norms.\
{\listtext	2.	}Natural norms are expressible in generic propositions.\
{\listtext	3.	}Scientific realism is true. So there are natural kinds, generic fax, or formal.\
{\listtext	4.	}Generics also express functional facts, which are natural teleological facts.\
{\listtext	5.	}This teleology is scientific. \
{\listtext	6.	}These generics are true of all living things.\
{\listtext	7.	}Humans are living things so there are some generic for a few minutes.\
{\listtext	8.	}The generic that human beings are rational animals truth. \
{\listtext	9.	}That we are rational animals entails the presence of a bunch of properties, including some functional facts.\
{\listtext	10.	}Are function is at least on the face of it to become fully human, and to perform a characteristic works. We should not assume that we have one such work such as rational activity, because it may be that the function is to rationalize are, to the best. To make our body and our property and our clothing and so on rational.\
{\listtext	11.	}Virtues would be those qualities therefore that are formally part of being a rational animal and that is living a life of rational animals and becoming fully rational and fully mature.\
{\listtext	12.	}That is just with the new Aristotelians say.\
{\listtext	13.	}Virtus pertain to social, linguistic, intellectual, and practical activities, as per the analytic definition of practical rationality.\
{\listtext	14.	}Moderation is a virtue and his self regarding.\
{\listtext	15.	}Tolerance is a virtue and his other Re:, and helps us to tolerate differences and even mistakes in our fellow animals.\
{\listtext	16.	}All of the virtues are united within practical rationality, and so practical reason. Practical reason is what we are eating important sense. And practical reason does not separate from our inability. Animal. If it were, but McDowell would be right about a dualism, between humanity in nature. Air animal and culture. But he is not. Nature is unrestricted, which is agnostic.\
{\listtext	17.	}Practical reason is by definition the orientation to do good and avoid evil. But does not mean of course that we always do good or that we always aim to do things we know we're good. It means that the only reason we do things we know are bad, is in pursuit of some good. Unaliened apologist could learn this to if they were practical animals. So this truth is discoverable from within and from without the practical point of you. Practical reason is also objective, it interacts with the moral order, or practical order, or space of reasons as a whole.\
{\listtext	18.	}Practical wisdom is especially important because it blocks individual relativism, United the virtues, and perfects out nature even more than intellectual wisdoms. but is practical wisdom itself culturally relative? Yes and no. To see that it is not relative requires one to be in the proper culture. In the wrong culture, one night mistakenly believe that it is relative. This is a paradox that cannot be resolved blithely. McIntyre does probably the best job of attempting to resolve it. This kind of practical wisdom is compatible with affirming the value of virtue tolerance and moral objectivity.\
{\listtext	19.	}Our human function is minimally, to become fully human, but must include some knowledge. What knowledge? At the very minimum, a knowledge of our human telos. \
{\listtext	20.	}Our end is death. Individually. The end of our species is extinction. Is there any point to becoming virtuous, is there any point to becoming human? There seems to be. This is a matter of some faith however.\
{\listtext	21.	}Two choices face us, remain human, become human, including excepting our mortality as a species. Or attempt to become transhumant or post-human, including space travel, genetic modification, and so on. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Schedule and Checklist: \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 March and April\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf2 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Write all chapter drafts\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Revise 1\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Revise 2\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Revise 3\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Revise 4\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Give to Bradshaw 1-2\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Give Garten 3\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Give Lindsay 3\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u10003 
\f0 	}Give Don 3\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Make revisions to 3\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give to Bradshaw 3\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 Chapter 4 Normative Human Nature
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls5\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Garten 4\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Lindsay 4\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Don 4\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Listen and revise 4\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Make Garten etc. revisions to 4\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give to Bradshaw 4\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \
\
May
\b0 \
Chapter 5 Virtue for Practical, Rational Animals\
Chapter 6 Virtue and Vice in Neo-Aristotelians \
Chapter 7 Practical Reasoning Social Animals\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls6\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Revise 5 virtue and vice (May)\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Listen and revise 5\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Garten 5\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Lindsay 5\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Don 5\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Revise 5 on Garten etc.\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give to Bradshaw 5\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Revise 6 virtue and reason (May)\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Listen and revise 6\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Garten 6\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Lindsay 6\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Don 6\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Revise 6 on Garten etc.\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give to Bradshaw 6\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Write 7 practical reason (May)\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Listen to 7\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Garten 7\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Lindsay 7\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Don 7\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Revise 7 on Garten etc.\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give to Bradshaw 7\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \
June
\b0 \
Chapter 8 Practical Wisdom in Rational Animals\
Chapter 9 Flourishing for Practical, Rational Animals\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls7\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Write 8 practical wisdom (May)\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Listen to 8\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Garten 8 \
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Lindsay  8\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Don 8\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Write 9 flourishing (June)\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Listen to 9\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Garten 9\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Lindsay 9\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Give Don 9\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Research 4-8\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Write 9\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \
July\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls8\ilvl0
\b0 \cf2 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Chapter 10 Conclusion\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Chapter 1 revision\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \
August\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls9\ilvl0
\b0 \cf2 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Revise 1-5\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \
September
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls10\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Revise 6-10\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 \
October
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls11\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Finalize 1-9\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Spell-check all\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Double check footnotes\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Listen to whole thing\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Pay for editor on eLance or Upwork\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Write abstract \
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Write front matter\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Find latex for front matter\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Create table of contents\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Acknowledgment \
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Index\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 November
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls12\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Submit to graduate school\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Submit to committee\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Print for graduate school\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Buy some Bourbon\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\'97\'97\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 maybe put \'93rise of virtue ethics\'94 sooner?\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 4\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >It is widely agreed that a virtue is a trait of character. Michael Slote says that an individual virtue is conceived as \'93an inner trait or disposition of the individual.\'94 Rosalind Hursthouse has attempted to articulate in detail what such a trait would consist in. The key point, in her view, seems to be that a virtue is not merely a disposition to act in certain characteristic ways. To be sure, a virtue does lead one to act in characteristic ways, but beyond this, it leads one to act in such ways for characteristic reasons and in a characteristic manner, to have certain characteristic attitudes and emotions, to be acute in detecting cases in which the virtue is at issue, and so on.[@copp2004morality 516]\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Davidson, \'91How is Weakness of the Will Possible?\'92, in 
\i Essays on Actions and Events
\i0 , 21\'9642.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Jessica Peirce the Laplacian view of nature  683, Bioethics Text book\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Education design article cite from google alerts in chapters early. Put it in and find it online. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b \cf2 After the Is-Ought Gap\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf2 The is-ought gap only arises in the minds of certain philosophers. In the minds of other philosophers, there is simply no problem. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 If the is-ought gap is a problem for you, then there is also a nature-normativity gap. You probably think all natural facts are non-normative and all normative \'93facts\'94 (or if you don\'92t believe in such facts, then normative *
\i concepts*
\i0 )  are non-factual. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 However, if the is-ought gap is not a problem for you, then there is a distinction (but not a gap) between natural descriptions and natural norms. You probably think some norms are descriptive (cars can drive) while some descriptions are normative (dogs have four legs. If a mother dog is pregnant, you can expect she ought to have a pup with four legs.)\
\
The is-ought gap was not a problem for many philosophers. It simply did not concern them. I mean \'93concern\'94 here in both senses; they did not pay it any attention and they did not feel great consternation over it. They didn\'92t bother with it and it didn\'92t bother them. \
\
Yet nowadays in analytic philosophy it is pretty widely felt that the is-ought gap is either insurmountable or that it is well nigh impossible to surmount. Hence, we are either forced to become normative non-naturalists (if we want to retain moral realism) or (if we want to retain naturalism) we are forced to go in for moral anti-realism. Simon Blackburn offers us a quasi-realist alternative that, to hear him tell the story, is virtually the only option if we are genuinely committed to naturalism but still pine for realism. \
\
What happened? If the is-ought gap arises only in the minds of certain philosophers, what thought precipitates it? If philosophers of ancient days did not bother with it, were they too daft to notice the problem or were they innocent of some confusion that plagues us? \
\
My goal in this brief discussion is to argue, with a very modest amount of rummaging through philosophical history, that the is-ought gap is no longer a problem. The historical anomaly that is the is-ought gap ought to be put to bed. We can preserve it, if we wish, in a glass case, as it were, for future philosophy students to observe and perhaps autopsy. But it should be did. \
\
It is not difficult to state, with some approximation, the time in history when the is-ought gap began to arise in force and cause great trouble among philosophers. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 The is-ought gap arises at precisely the moment (or just after) that a certain picture of nature arises in one\'92s mind. It is the picture of what John McDowel calls \'93bald nature.\'94 A dialogue between two character sin Andrei Tarkovsky\'92s film *Stalker* encapsulates this dreary picture quite well. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\i \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >WRITER: My dear! The world is absolutely dull, and that is why there\'92s neither telepathy, nor ghosts, nor flying saucers ... and there cannot be anything of the kind. Iron laws control the world and it\'92s intolerably boring. And these laws, alas, cannot be broken. They\'92re not able to. And believe not in the flying saucers. That would be all too interesting.\
>LADY: And what about the Bermuda triangle? Are you also going to argue that...?\
>WRITER: I am going to argue. There\'92s no Bermuda triangle. There\'92s a triangle ABC, which is even to a triangle A\uc0\u8242 B\u8242 C\u8242 . Do you feel, what a doleful boredom this statement rooms? However, in the middle ages it was interesting. In every home there was a house-spirit, in every church \'96 God... People were young! Now each fourth is an old man. Boring, my angel, oh how boring.
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
Now, some others call this picture Newtonian. However, Alvin Plantinga has persuasively inveighed against smearing Newton so. Newton was a dyed-in-the-wool supernaturalist who believed the laws of nature were the laws of nature\'92s God. Plantinga, like a gentlemen, offers an alternative which I think is the choicest name for this picture: Laplacian nature. \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 As soon as the picture of Laplacian nature was presented to you, the is-ought gap became fatal. As soon as someone told you a story, or you had a sort of miserific vision of nature as bald, mechanical, cold, meaningless, dry, disenchanted, interminable, fatal, dull, dreary, and dead \'97 you became a normative non-naturalist or an anti-realist naturalist. \
\
The thing to realize is that this conception of nature, the Laplacian one, is neither scientific nor natural. For  \'93nature\'94 is a word like \'93thing\'94 that can mean anything. And before we look at \'93everything\'94 all at once and determine what \'93everything\'94 is like in our world-picture, we should look at specific things. Before we decide what can possibly count as \'93natural\'94 and \'93non-natural,\'94 we should look at some nature. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 The first thing to look at is any living organism \'97 say, fungus. Fungus is not a part of Laplacian nature. Bacteria are impossible in Laplaces nature. Reductionism of biological organisms to physical or mechanical systems has simply failed. In the heady days of the scientific revolution, perhaps, there was some sense in holding out hope that reductionism would come through in the end. But it has been 300 years, and we are not an inch further down the road of successful reduction. Indeed, we are miles further back. We now know what Newton, Hume, Laplace did not know \'97 that the biomass of microbial life outweighs mammalian life by an order of hundreds (Whitman 1998). And that the mitochondria of a single celled organism are more complicated than cars. Laplace simply lacked the imagination (or the prophetic power) to belief that all the variegated functions and forms of life on earth (and perhaps elsewhere) are something new, something unprecedented, something like a singularity in the cosmos. \
\
The second thing to look at is apes and dolphins. These fascinating creatures are nowhere to be found in the \'93impoverished arsenals of the [Laplacian] imagination\'94 (to borrow a fine-tipped phrase from Sir Richard Dawkins). \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 There is no \'93enchantment\'94 to this enchanting picture. It is the scientific picture, if biology, organic chemistry, primatology, ethology, sociology, or any of the other dozens of life sciences and social sciences are genuine sciences. To quote Dawkins again, a poet of science if there ever was one \'97 \'93The scientific world view is \'85 exciting\'85 poetic\'85 filled with sheer wonder\'85\'94 He may be a physicalist but but the belief that \'93physical\'94 just means \'93Laplacian\'94 is a superstition. If the \'93physical\'94 is the \'93Laplacian\'94 then the \'93physical\'94 excludes fungus, the ostrich, and us.\
\
Thomas Nagel\'92s delightfully simple, deceptively profound, and terrifyingly significant *Mind and Cosmos* is just one of a new windfall of modern philosophers who are scientific, naturalistic, and unapologetically non-Laplacian. Nagel includes not just life (as I have) but consciousness, rationality, and morality as the egg on Laplace\'92s face. He cannot, and never will be able to, account for them. \
\
So we live in a time after the is-ought gap. It did not exist in the ancient and medieval world. It was born, somewhere after the scientific revolution, in the minds of those with a genuine admiration for modern science who mistook the \'93scientific\'94 picture for the Laplacian one. However, it began to age \'97 and not gracefully either \'97 Somewhere around the discovery of the gene, or DNA, the dominant view of nature ceased to be the Laplacian one. Working scientists do not bother reducing things that are, to them, obviously fundamental properties of living organisms. These are not ghosts in every house or gods in every church; these are microbiomes that live on your body and outnumber your very cells. These are organs that pump blood to your brain so you can read these words.  The is-ought gap grew old and sickly in the heady days of reductionism, eliminative and monistic physicalism, and logical positivism. It is now barely alive on life support and gasping its last. I would dare to venture that this essay will help us all to collectively pull the plug. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Since the rise of modern science, life, consciousness, rationality, and morality have not gone away. Life, consciousness, and the others are never going away. But life, consciousness, and the others are incompatible with the Laplacian picture. And without the Laplacian picture of nature, there is no is-ought gap. And we ought to reject the out-dated, unscientific, anti-naturalistic, dreadfully simplistic Laplacian picture. So we ought to realize there is no is-ought gap. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls13\ilvl0\cf2 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}"Everything has to tell a story."\
}