{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## Is practical reason knowledge?\
\
McDowell argues that the virtues are various "sensitivities" to the salient facts about how to live. Virtue is a kind of knowledge, namely *practical knowledge* (a \'93disposition to act well\'94).  The answer to "how?" questions is an item of knowledge. "How do I unscrew a light bulb?" is a request for an instruction ("twist left") or set of instructions, ("first, grip the light bulb; then twist left until it comes loose."). The answer to the question of how to live will be not just a proposition but a plan. \
\
To see why it makes sense to conceive of virtue as practical knowledge, suppose that some platitudinous value (say, kindness) is really a virtue. The kind person is reliably kind and is kind *on purpose*. A person who merely happens to be kind or who commits acts of kindness resulting from blind instinct does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. A person who is kind once, or even every now and then, likewise does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. Rather, a kind person is one who is regularly sensitive to a range of reasons for behaving in a particular way. The kind person, McDowell adduces, "has a reliable sensitivity to a certain sort of requirement which situations impose on behavior" and such "deliverances of a reliable sensitivity are cases of knowledge."[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] The kind person *knows* what is called for, is intentional about avoiding cruel or indifferent behavior, and so on. \
\
If kindness is \'93a sort of perceptual capacity\'94, \'93specialized sensitivity\'94 to a particular range of reasons for action (say, the feelings of others), then perhaps the same holds true for other virtues.[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] In fact, McDowell suggests, the notion that virtues are specialized sensitivities \'97 each a kind of knowledge \'97 helps us understand the Socratic notion of the unity of virtue. \
\
These reflections support the notion that this kind of knowledge ("sensitivity to reasons") is necessary for the virtue but not sufficient. For it might be that one is sensitive to what another would feel but still fail to act rightly. Why? Perhaps, like the overindulgent parent, one is *too* sensitive to the feelings of the child or *not sensitive enough* to other considerations, like the child\'92s health or (McDowell\'92s example) fairness. The virtuous person is sensitive to a whole range of reasons; since reason A and reason B might commend different acts, part of virtue must be the meta-cognitive capacity to reflect upon all those reasons available to one, to rank and order them. \
\
McDowell\'92s \'93preliminary case\'94 that virtue is knowledge is that the \'93requirement imposed by the situation\'85 must exhaust his reason for acting as he does.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] It would disqualify the act as a candidate for an example of kindness if the agent performed it *because* it was kind *and because good repute was likely to follow*. If we run the same calculus on each particular virtue, we can hypothesize that virtuous agents\'92 behavior in each case is explained by their sensitivity to those particular kinds of reasons. In turn, their behavior in general (when virtuous) is explained by their sensitivity in general. He concludes, \'93thus the particular virtues are not a batch of Independent sensitivities. Rather, we use the concepts of the particular virtues to mark similarities and dissimilarities among the manifestations of a single sensitivity which is what virtue, in general, is: an ability to recognize requirements which situations impose on one's behavior. It is a single complex sensitivity of the sort which we are aiming to instill when we aim to inculcate a moral outlook.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 333]\
\
Now, if virtue is knowledge, and (rational, deductive sorts of) knowledge are codifiable in propositional form, then it would seem to be necessary that virtue knowledge is codifiable. But \'91knowing-what-to-do\'92 is not codifiable, so virtue must not be knowledge. \
\
On this objection, the virtuous person enjoys knowledge of one or a few universal ethical precepts and reliably calculates the application of those principles to individual occasions. The virtuous person\'92s ethical arguments \'93take the form of a \'91practical syllogism\'92\'94 wherein the universal proposition is the major premise and the \'93relevant particular knowledge\'94 is a minor premise, while the issuing conclusion is the judgment of \'93what is to be done.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 336] Furthermore, on this objection, the defender of Humean moral psychology can keep the identification of relevant particular knowledge with a \'93minor premise\'94 but substitute the proposed major premise (a proposition such as \'93It is always good to be courageous\'94) with a non-cognitive desire or commitment (such as \'93*I want* to be courageous\'94 or \'93Be courageous!\'94). Now, they can explain how a virtuous person and non-virtuous person can both perceive a situation identically but fail to perform the same action with reference to their different desires or commitments. \
\
The problem with this objection, McDowell thinks, is not so much a problem with our moral theory but a problem with our conception of rationality. The problem stems from a \'93deep-rooted prejudice\'94 that rationality is a rule-following procedure. If rationality is a rule-following procedure, then it follows that *either* practical rationality and morality are likewise rule-following procedures *or* that practical rationality and morality is not, ultimately, sufficiently *rational*.  Some philosophers (often followers of Hume but not necessarily Hume himself) think that morality is a not rational domain but a domain of sentiments, desires, commitments, approvals, and so on. Other philosophers (often followers of Kant) think that morality is a rational domain and hence must be a matter of identifying first principles and \'93applying\'94 them to particular situations. But what they share in common is a belief that \'93rationality must be explicable in terms of being guided by a formulable universal principle.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] This common belief McDowell wishes to refute. MacIntyre, similarly,  denies the assumption that normative ethical rules can be derived from universal ethical principles the way we \'93apply\'94 universal logical truths to particular logical conclusions via a middle term.[@macintyre1984does.]\
\
McDowell\'92s discussion here (drawing on Wittgenstein and others) is hard to follow. The point seems to be that even apparently obvious cases where the rational thing to do is to follow an objective rule (say, by extending a series of numbers) turn out to be cases of a much messier process in which there is no such objective rule by appeal to which we can explain rational thoughts or behaviors. If Bob instructs Charlie to \'93add 2\'94 to a number and continue applying the rule indefinitely, we tend to be confident Charlie will produce \'932, 4, 6, 8,\'94 etc., which will \'93churn out the appropriate behavior with the sort of reliability which a physical mechanism, say a piece of clockwork, might have.\'94 We postulate a \'93psychological mechanism, underlying his behavior, by an inference analogous to that whereby one might hypothesize a physical structure underlying the observable motions of some inanimate object.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] The \'93ground and nature of our confidence\'94 that we will reliably apply rules is not but a common form of life. The \'91form of life\'92 is a term of art here from Wittgenstein (and quoted with approval from Stanley Cavell) that refers to that difficult-to-define process by which we learn how reliably to use words in our native language, how to make exclamations like a pained \'93ow!\'94 or an excited \'93ooh!\'94, when to laugh at jokes, and when to cry in pity. Our shared rationality, McDowell suggests, is not grounded in \'93external\'94 objective rules but in a shared form of life or what he calls a \'93congruence of subjectivities\'94.[@mcdowell1979virtue 339] McDowell admits this is a disconcerting hypothesis; it induces \'93vertigo.\'94 But, our response to such vertigo should not be to embrace a \'93consoling myth\'94. That myth he says is the two notions that (a) rule-following is a psychological mechanism that \'97 absent mistakes \'97 guarantees consistency, and that there exist objective facts of the matter over and above the congruence of subjectivities. If we abandon these two notions and embrace the model of deductive rationality as grounded only in our intersubjective form of life, then the corresponding model of practical rationality will become tenable. \
\
Although McDowell argues that virtue is not codifiable, still it is a kind of knowledge. But if virtue knowledge is not codifiable then how is it *consistent*? What guarantees that the moral person\'92s behavior is intelligibly the same from case to case? On the one hand, if moral knowledge is rational then it is consistent from case to case and situation to situation; but if, as McDowell has been arguing, both deductive reasoning and practical reasoning are not merely consistent by being like a rule-following machine or computer, how do we explain the virtuous person's reliably correct behavior? Section 5 of the article answers this question by way of Aristotle's practical syllogisms.\
\
The 'practical syllogism' takes the following shape: \
\
1. X is good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. (E.g., it is good to instantiate justice in the classroom).\
2. Z would be X. (E.g., giving everyone a chance to re-take a quiz that was unavailable due to technical problems would be instantiate justice in my classroom.)\
3. Therefore, Z would be good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. \
\
On the strictly deductive logical model, the role of the major premise is to provide rock solid universal ethical principles from which to derive particular moral duties. But McDowell resists this model. On the strictly non-cognitivist model, without universal ethical principles we are left with universal psychological states (consistent desires, plans, values, or norms). McDowell also resists this. On the non-codifiable model, what does the major premise do? Its role, he says, is to state a "certain conception of how to live... [namely] the *virtuous person's conception* of the sort of life a human being should lead."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343. Emphasis added.] It is clear upon reflection that this account is a sort of circular reasoning. For the virtuous person's conception of how to live is itself conditioned by what he called earlier 'the moral outlook'. That conception of how to live, in turn, conditions what particular saliences are noticed (what minor premises) and generates practical conclusions about what is to be done. What kind of life should a human being lead? The answer "cannot be definitively written down."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] Furthermore, "Any attempt to capture it in words will recapitulate the character of the teaching whereby it might be instilled: generalizations will be approximate at best..."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] The upshot of the combination of non-codifiability with a practical syllogistic form is that the virtuous person takes for a rule of life some conception of how to live but that this conception is part of what it means to be a virtuous person. (Hence the vertigo.)\
\
We might wonder why we are bothering about formal syllogistic reasoning at this point. But this way of understanding the practical syllogism *does* do good job of providing a plausible explanation of moral motivation (reasons one might act in some way) and moral behavior (reasons one acted that way). To paraphrase McDowell: "Explanations of judgments about what to do are explanations of actions."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342. Verbatim, he says: "The explanations, so far treated as explanations of judgments about what to do, are equally explanations of actions."] I can explain your behavior by understanding that you were concerned for your friend\'92s welfare and reached out to help. Likewise, you can explain your decision to help by assuring me that you are concerned for your friend\'92s welfare. For McDowell, the general structure of the practical syllogism is useful. He says \'93the rationality of virtue\'85 is not demonstrable from an external standpoint.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 346]}