{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\ftech\fcharset77 Symbol;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red53\green53\blue53;}
\deftab560
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf2 After the Is-Ought Gap\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf2 The is-ought gap only arises in the minds of certain philosophers. In the minds of other philosophers, there is simply no problem. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 If the is-ought gap is a problem for you, then there is also a nature-normativity gap. You probably think all natural facts are non-normative and all normative \'93facts\'94 are non-factual \'97 that is, if you don\'92t believe in such facts, then all normative concepts are non-natural concepts that either have no referent or have a natural referent.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 However, if the is-ought gap is not a problem for you, then there is a distinction (but not a gap) between natural descriptions and natural norms. You probably think some norms are descriptive (cars can drive) while some descriptions are normative (dogs have four legs. If a mother dog is pregnant, you can expect she ought to have a pup with four legs.)\
\
The is-ought gap was not a problem for many philosophers. It simply did not concern them. I mean \'93concern\'94 here in both senses; they did not pay it any attention and they did not feel great consternation over it. They didn\'92t bother with it; and it didn\'92t bother them. \
\
Yet nowadays in analytic philosophy it is pretty widely felt that the is-ought gap is either insurmountable or that it is well nigh impossible to surmount. Hence, we are either forced to become normative non-naturalists (if we want to retain moral realism) or we are forced to go in for moral anti-realism (if we want to retain naturalism). Simon Blackburn offers us a quasi-realist alternative that, to hear him tell the story, is virtually the only option if we are genuinely committed to naturalism but still pine for realism. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 He says naturalists demand: "To ask no more of the world than we already know is there\'97the ordinary features of things on the basis of which we make decisions about them, like or dislike them, fear them and avoid them, desire them and seek them out. It asks no more than this: a natural world, and patterns of reaction to it."[@blackburn1985spreading] \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
My question for this article is simple: What happened? If the is-ought gap arises only in the minds of certain philosophers, what thought precipitates it? If philosophers of ancient days did not bother with it, were they too daft to notice the problem? Were they innocent of some confusion that plagues us? \
\
My goal in this brief discussion is to argue, with a very modest amount of rummaging through philosophical history, that the is-ought gap is no longer a problem. The historical anomaly that is the is-ought gap ought to be put to bed. We can preserve it, if we wish, in a glass case, as it were, for future philosophy students to observe and perhaps autopsy. But it should be preserved as a dead thing, not a live threat. \
\
It is not difficult to state, with some approximation, the time in history when the is-ought gap began to arise in force and cause great trouble among philosophers. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 The is-ought gap arises at precisely the moment (or just after) that a certain picture of nature arises in one\'92s mind. It is the picture of what John McDowel calls \'93bald nature.\'94 A dialogue between two character sin Andrei Tarkovsky\'92s film *Stalker* encapsulates this dreary picture quite well. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\i \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 >WRITER: My dear! The world is absolutely dull, and that is why there\'92s neither telepathy, nor ghosts, nor flying saucers ... and there cannot be anything of the kind. Iron laws control the world and it\'92s intolerably boring. And these laws, alas, cannot be broken. They\'92re not able to. And believe not in the flying saucers. That would be all too interesting.\
>LADY: And what about the Bermuda triangle? Are you also going to argue that...?\
>WRITER: I am going to argue. There\'92s no Bermuda triangle. There\'92s a triangle ABC, which is even to a triangle A
\f1\i0 \uc0\u8242 
\f0\i B
\f1\i0 \uc0\u8242 
\f0\i C
\f1\i0 \uc0\u8242 
\f0\i . Do you feel, what a doleful boredom this statement rooms? However, in the middle ages it was interesting. In every home there was a house-spirit, in every church \'96 God... People were young! Now each fourth is an old man. Boring, my angel, oh how boring.
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
What should we call this picture of nature? Some polemicists will be quick to call it "the scientific" picture. They are wrong, and deadly wrong. They have no right to sully a noble word like "science" with this association, as I shall argue. The terminological issue is no mean issue. Some others call this picture Newtonian. However, Alvin Plantinga has persuasively inveighed against smearing Newton so. Newton was a dyed-in-the-wool supernaturalist who believed the laws of nature were the laws of nature\'92s God. Plantinga, like a gentlemen, offers an alternative: Laplacian nature. I think this is the choicest name for this picture of nature. \
\
With labels settled, we can return to the question. As soon as the picture of Laplacian nature was presented to you, the is-ought gap became fatal. As soon as someone told you a story, or you had a sort of miserific vision of nature as bald, mechanical, cold, meaningless, dry, disenchanted, interminable, fatal, dull, dreary, and dead \'97 you became a normative non-naturalist or an anti-realist naturalist. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
The thing to realize is that this conception of nature, the Laplacian one, is neither scientific nor natural. For  \'93nature\'94 is a word like \'93thing\'94 that can mean anything. And before we look at \'93everything\'94 all at once and determine what \'93everything\'94 is like in our world-picture, we should look at specific things. Before we decide what can possibly count as \'93natural\'94 and \'93non-natural,\'94 we should look at some actual natural things. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 The first thing to look at is any living organism \'97 say, fungus. Fungus is not a part of Laplacian nature. Bacteria are impossible in Laplace's nature. Reductionism of biological organisms to physical or mechanical systems has simply failed. In the heady days of the scientific revolution, perhaps, there was some sense in holding out hope that reductionism would come through in the end. But it has been 300 years, and we are not an inch further down the road of successful reduction. Indeed, we are miles further back. We now know what Newton, Hume, Laplace did not know \'97 that the biomass of microbial life outweighs mammalian life by an order of hundreds (Whitman 1998). And that the mitochondria of a single celled organism are more complicated than cars. Laplace simply lacked the imagination (or the prophetic power) to belief that all the variegated functions and forms of life on earth (and perhaps elsewhere) are something new, something unprecedented, something like a singularity in the cosmos. \
\
The second thing to look at is apes and dolphins. These fascinating creatures are nowhere to be found in the \'93impoverished arsenals of the [Laplacian] imagination\'94 (to borrow a fine-tipped phrase from Sir Richard Dawkins). \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 There is no \'93enchantment\'94 to this enchanting picture. It is the scientific picture, if biology, organic chemistry, primatology, ethology, sociology, or any of the other dozens of life sciences and social sciences are genuine sciences. To quote Dawkins again, a poet of science if there ever was one \'97 \'93The scientific world view is \'85 exciting\'85 poetic\'85 filled with sheer wonder\'85\'94 He may be a physicalist but but the belief that \'93physical\'94 just means \'93Laplacian\'94 is a superstition. If the \'93physical\'94 is the \'93Laplacian\'94 then the \'93physical\'94 excludes fungus, the ostrich, and us.\
\
Thomas Nagel\'92s delightfully simple, deceptively profound, and terrifyingly significant *Mind and Cosmos* is just one of a new windfall of modern philosophers who are scientific, naturalistic, and unapologetically non-Laplacian. The egg on the Laplacian face is not for Nagel not just life but consciousness, rationality, and morality. Laplace cannot, and never will be able to, account for them. \
\
So we live in a time after the is-ought gap. It did not exist in the ancient and medieval world. It was born, somewhere after the scientific revolution, in the minds of those with a genuine admiration for modern science who mistook the \'93scientific\'94 picture for the Laplacian one. However, it began to age \'97 and not gracefully either \'97 Somewhere around the discovery of the gene, or DNA, the dominant view of nature ceased to be the Laplacian one. Working scientists do not bother reducing things that are, to them, obviously fundamental properties of living organisms. These are not ghosts in every house or gods in every church; these are microbiomes that live on your body and outnumber your very cells. These are organs that pump blood to your brain so you can read these words.  The is-ought gap grew old and sickly in the heady days of reductionism, eliminative and monistic physicalism, and logical positivism. It is now barely alive on life support and gasping its last. I would dare to venture that this essay will help us all to collectively pull the plug. \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Since the rise of modern science, life, consciousness, rationality, and morality have not gone away. Life, consciousness, and the others are never going away. But life, consciousness, and the others are incompatible with the Laplacian picture. And without the Laplacian picture of nature, there is no is-ought gap. And we ought to reject the out-dated, unscientific, anti-naturalistic, dreadfully simplistic Laplacian picture. So we ought to realize there is no is-ought gap. }