{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Some people believe \'93nature is it\'94 \'97 nature (spacetime, energy, and whatever the smallest bits of matter are,in various configurations) is all there is. Some others believe nature is not \'93it.\'94 There is nature, spacetime, matter, energy, etc. plus something else. These views are not compatible. As contrary statements, one must be true and the other false (I don\'92t see how both could be false, other than to say that there is 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
neither 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
nature 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
nor 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
anything else... but let\'92s ignore that.) \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A catalog of the beliefs of all the philosophers and scientists would list some of each on either side. \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
As philosophical disagreements go, the view that nature is or is not \'93it\'94 \'97 the \'93whole show\'94 \'97 is something more than a philosophical agreement. Each thought runs down deep into the heart and mind of the person who thinks it, tying together a dizzying array of related beliefs: is there a god? Do we have souls? Is matter (or the entire cosmos) eternal? How old is the cosmos? Is there an objective meaning or significance to human life? What is death?\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
As such, these respective views are banners of not merely the philosophical framework in which all of life, let alone scientific and philosophical inquiry, but of differing cultures. \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
It is difficult to confront someone from a widely varying culture. Once, on a trip to Mongolia to teach English to high schoolers, I had an argument with a middle-aged, drunk Mongolian man about American \'93imperialism.\'94 With his mistress on his arm (his wife was at home), he smiled and shouted at me to \'93go home,\'94 to take my American clothing, religion, language, music, and movies back to America with me and leave him in peace. I did not, at the time, understand his worry or his anger. I was a freshmen in college and had lived in the U.S. my whole life, and had only visited Mexico and Canada. What do you mean \'93American clothes\'94? I just thought of them as 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
clothes.
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 \'a0I was the fish that did not know he was wet. Another time, on my first visit to New York, I dialogued with a Muslim on the street outside a mosque. \'93You believe that God is the creator, and all-merciful, and the father of men, right?\'94 He was incensed. \'93No, God is not my father. That would make me, his son, a god. God is my creator, my ruler, my master, not my father.\'94 He did not understand me, nor I him. \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The peril of miscommunication in such conversations between people of radically differing cultures is great. So when discussing the view that \'93nature is it\'94, a proportionally great caution is needed. Merely citing the writings of thinkers on either side of the debate is not enough. We must be (or become) sensitive to the differing emotions, motivations, and all-important implications of each side. \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Most people prefer others who think, talk, and act like themselves. As much as possible, human nature likes to \'93live and let live.\'94 But there exist reasons, some highly important reasons, for transgressing into the boundaries of another culture and \'93making converts.\'94 If Richard Dawkins sees supernaturalism (the view that nature is not all there is) as militating against proper scientific research, enslaving millions in falsehood and irrationality, he cannot simply stand by and let delusions be delusions. If Edward Feser sees the view that nature is it as militating against proper religious belief, enslaving millions in falsehood and irrationality, he cannot simply stand by and let delusions be delusions. \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Professional philosophers have a professional interest in persuading other philosophers of their views. But anyone on either side of this intellectual fault line probably knows and cares about someone else on the other side \'97 \'93the far side.\'94 It might be close friends, colleagues, public intellectuals, their own parents or children. The stakes are high. \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
As a universal affirmative categorical proposition, \'93All that exists is a natural thing,\'94 a single instance of a non-natural thing (whether sub-natural or super-natural) furnishes a contradiction. The universal affirmative disjunctive proposition, \'93All that exists is either natural or non-natural\'94 is trivial in being necessarily true. Better then to frame the disagreement as a universal negative categorical statement on the one hand, and a particular affirmative categorical proposition on the other: \'93No things that exist are non-natural things,\'94 as against \'93Some things that exist are non-natural things.\'94 As a logically contradictory pair, the disagreement is clear. Naturalists really do affirm the first; non-naturalists really do affirm the second. \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl400
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
What kinds of entities or properties are thought to be at least possibly non-natural? Aquinas\'92 God and angels, St. Paul\'92s human souls, Plato\'92s forms, heccaeties, Spinoza\'92s monads, Hegel\'92s 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
geist, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Moore\'92s property of goodness,
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
and more. A middle class of possibly non-natural objects are numbers, universals, properties, propositions, sets, moral values. \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
The goal of this paper is to examine a set of the best arguments in favor of the existence of any non-natural entities and a set of arguments opposed to their existence. But a subsidiary goal, necessarily more speculative and obscure, is to examine the motivations and deeper and broader cultural differences between these sets of arguments. Why think nature is it? Why think nature is not it? And, more deeply, 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
why? }