{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
## Introduction ##\
\
\
The purpose of this dissertation is to analyze the concept of virtue and related concepts in the writings of four important contemporary virtue ethicists. The four are: Alasdair MacIntyre, Philippa Foot, John McDowell, and Robert M. Adams. For each philosopher, I devote a chapter summarizing the core commitments of his or her moral philosophy before attacking what seems implausible and defending what seems true. \
\
### Thesis  ###\
\
In the end, this dissertation defends four claims: (a) commonly accepted virtues of the mind and will (such as courage, justice, moderation, and practical wisdom, wisdom) are perfections of human nature in practice, that (b) such virtues are necessary for human beings as such \'97 i.e. the task of becoming  virtuous is *a categorical imperative,* a perfect duty, an unconditional obligation that also has the best consequences, makes the most people most happy; that (c) though not all people accurately described as \'91virtuous\'92 are accurately described as \'91happy\'92, only virtuous people are happy, and finally (d) a second-order claim about claims (a)-(c) that they are compatible with metaphysical naturalism correctly understood.  \
\
The first three claims are liable to be seen by some as platitudes. The fourth is perhaps still lively and controversial. Regardless, there are objections to all these claims. Just as importantly, there are objections to *the assumptions undergirding* such claims. \
\
My goal is not in the end to uncover any fresh moral truths nor even to freshly demonstrate age-old platitudes. My strategy is essential conservative: to dismantle common prejudicial objections to the assumptions undergirding (a)-(c) and rendering it plausible to believe (a)-(c) if each objection can be either undercut or rebutted. My dialectical strategy is to assume that virtue talk and virtue concepts not only enrich our philosophical ethics and philosophical lives but are indispensable, to allow objections or resistance (even hostile or dismissive objections) to surface, and to diffuse such resistance. \
\
The defense of these claims, therefore, will be an exploration of three concepts: virtue, practical reason, and happiness.  What do these terms mean? Details are needed, but I thought it best to offer a very rough initial account of three key terms: *Virtues* are positive, admirable character qualities that are necessary for living well; *practical reason* is that faculty of rational reflection and deliberation by which we construct and execute life plans; and *happiness* is quite simply a name for a person (or group) whose life is going well, who has good character traits, has a good life plan and is executing it more or less according to plan. \
\
The concepts of virtue, practical reason, and happiness are the primary focus of this research. But my focus will extend to include other key concepts that these philosophers invoke in their account of virtue. For instance, *practice* is a key secondary concept in MacIntyre because he defines virtues as \'93acquired human qualities that enable their possessor to achieve those goods which are internal to *practices*.\'94[@macintyre1984after, 191, emphasis added. *After Virtue* was published in 1981. Unless otherwise noted, the citations in this proposal refer to the 1984 second edition.]  To discuss MacIntyre's account of virtue it will be useful to discuss writings like those of Michael Thompson, who gives an account of life, action, and practice.[@thompson2008life] Another key secondary concept is that of a *human lifeform*, because Philippa Foot argues that virtues are necessary for creatures like us. She makes the analogy that, \'93virtues play a necessary part in the life of human beings as do stings in the life of bees\'94.[@foot2001natural 35] To discuss her account of virtue it will be useful to discuss the concept of what is \'93necessary for humans\'94 in writings like those of Peter Geach, whose analogy she is paraphrasing. Similarly, the concept of *human nature* is key for Foot (as for Rosalind Hursthouse), as is *second nature* for McDowell. \
\
These are age-old themes. Treating them adequately is the task of a lifetime, not a single dissertation. "The measure of listening to such discussions is the whole of life."[@plato 
\i Republic 
\i0 450b.] Yet they are worthy themes. Even an inadequate treatment of a worthy theme may hope to attain some value. To render these themes more manageable, I limit my scope to the ethical writings of four contemporary "neo-Aristotelian" virtue theorists. I remain sensitive to his or her project and major claims, to the constructive arguments supporting those claims, and to the various local skirmishes that arise from particular critics. Even so, common themes emerge and this author's (perhaps idiosyncratic) commitments become clear as the dust settles. }