{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ### No human nature\
\
The first objection is simply that the search for human nature is hopeless because there is no human nature. This objection has three iterations. Let's consider each in turn.\
\
### No Natural Kinds\
\
The first sort of critic might deny that there is any such thing as a human life form because there are no life forms at all. Perhaps, instead of real life forms and natural kinds, we should be nominalist about divisions between various branches of the tree of life. Evolutionary biology tells us that genetically modern humankind is the latest in a series of species. This is prima facie in tension with the notion of fixed, stable human nature. Ernst Mayr puts the alleged tension between the flexibility of evolutionary species and a fixed human nature in this way: \
\
>The concepts of unchanging essences and of complete discontinuities between every *eidos* (type) and all others make genuine evolutionary thinking impossible. I\'a0agree with those who claim that the essentialist philosophies of Aristotle and Plato are incompatible with evolutionary thinking.[@mayr1970populations 4]\
\
Arthur Ward is one who agrees with Mary here. He argues that "naturalists should reject the idea of 'human nature,' and indeed should reject that any organism or its parts or operations has a nature, purpose, proper function, or the like."[@ward2013against 1] \
\
### Natural Kinds, but no Natural Telos\
\
Relatedly, the second sort of critic accepts natural kinds but denies that these kinds have teleological features.  Even the singular noun phrase "human nature" is liable to sound mystical, like a platonic universal underlying all human beings.  Bernard Williams summarizes the antiquated worldview that many are suspicious of:\
\
>The idea of a naturalistic ethics was born of a deeply teleological outlook, and its best expression, in many ways, is still to be found in Aristotle's philosophy, a philosophy according to which there is inherent in each natural kind of thing an appropriate way for things of that kind to behave.[Cf. @williams1995making 109] \
\
Elsewhere, Williams says:  "The first and hardest lesson of Darwinism, that there is no such teleology at all, and that there is no orchestral score provided from anywhere according to which human beings have a special part to play, still has to find its way into ethical thought."[@williams2011ethics 44]\
\
If humans are in fact a mess, then the true generics accurately picking out their characteristic behaviors would be messy; and the normative conclusions to be derived from them would be equally messy. Humans are occasionally irrational and always variable. Human beings posit themselves, create themselves, define their values, chart their destinies, and all in different ways. \
\
\
### Natural Kinds, and Natural Telos, but only Reproduction\
\
A third iteration is that if there is such thing as "human nature", it is nothing more or less than our biological and physiological makeup. Tim Lewens argues that "the only biologically respectable notion of human nature that remains is an extremely permissive one that names the reliable dispositions of the human species as a whole. This conception offers no ethical guidance..."[@lewens2012human] \
\
On Lewens' view, the only talk about our "nature" that would be scientific would be an indeterminate series of complicated stories about our genetics, evolutionary history, and neurophysiology, perhaps even including cultural, geographical, and ecological settings. The problem, as we have seen, is that an empirical "scientific" conception of human nature has nothing to do with *ethics*. All of the complicated stories we could tell -- if they are genuinely scientific -- would be purely *descriptive*.[Cf. @hursthouse1998virtue chapter 10; @brown2008virtue chapter 5; @ward2013against] \
\
Relatedly, nature has bestowed upon us what Williams calls "ill-sorted bricolage of powers and instincts": \
\
>The second and more general reason lies not in the particular ways in which human beings may have evolved, but simply in the fact that they have evolved, and by natural selection... On that [evolutionary] view it must be the deepest desire\'97-need?-\'97purpose?--satisfaction?--of human beings to live in the way that is in this objective sense appropriate to them (the fact that modern words break up into these alternatives expresses the modern break\uc0\u8208 up of Aristotle's view).\
\
This is also Fitzpatrick's main worry, not that we have evolved poorly, but that we evolved at all.[@sepmoralitybiology] He argues that evolved organisms have a telos to reproduce, not to "flourish". \cf0  Stephen Brown ambivalently agrees that ethics is a descriptive discipline in the end; even virtue ethics, after being appropriately "naturalized", does not *commend* the virtues so much as *detail* the traits which happen to be adaptive for creatures like us to survive and propagate our genotype.[@brown2008virtue; @brown2005really] Although the "characteristic form of life" of human beings involves highly rarified neurological and cognitive processes we do not observe in other animals, nevertheless, nature only reveals one kind of biological concept of nature: a species. And species aim to survive and reproduce. \cf0 \
\
\
### Natural Kinds, Natural Telos, More than Reproduction, but Known from "Inside" Human Point of View\
\
Another way of putting this same criticism is that there are no objective properties obtaining in each and every human *which can be known from the objective, external, scientific point of view.* Perhaps some universal intersubjective properties obtain, like a desire for belonging; but these can only be known "from within" the human point of view. \
\
Even if "natural norms" such as those argued for in the previous chapter existed, this objection says, they would be irrelevant from the practical point of view.[@frey. Her dissertation is a full-scale rebuttal of this objection. I shall review her arguments in a later chapter.]  For if objective norms may be known from an external, scientific point of view, even so, they are impractical; human rationality allows us to reflect upon them and decide whether or not to allow them to count as reasons for action. Alternately, if norms of practical reason are knowable from within the practical (subjective, internal, non-scientific) point of view, then they the objective facts of our nature are irrelevant. If by being practical reasoners we are free of the tyranny of biology, then biology is irrelevant to morality.  Hursthouse assumes that knowledge of humanity "from the outside" is useless or futile. She says, "Ethical naturalism is not to be construed as the attempt to ground ethical evaluations in a scientific account of human nature."[@hursthouse1998virtue especially chapter 10] \cf0 She emphatically *does* mean to make evaluations of human beings can be made in a way analogous to the way we evaluate cacti or deer.  In each case we rely on the notion of natural kinds and their appropriate way of behaving:\
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 >[I]n relation to which they are evaluated as good or defective. The evaluations do not\'97as they might in a post\uc0\u8208 Darwinian age\'97evaluate members of species of living things simply as good, or not so good, or downright defective, as replicators of their genes.[@hursthouse1998virtue 257-8]\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
Hursthouse and McDowell's alternative is to base ethical considerations on our nature as rational agents. This is still loosely naturalistic, in that we are talking about "human nature" or "second nature".  \
\
### Our nature is unknown \
\
A final iteration of this objection is that human nature is just mysterious. For all we can tell (without the benefit of divine revelation) humanity is an anomaly. Our origin is shrouded in mystery, our destiny undecided. }