Blackburn, Simon "A not-so-common good"

# A not-so common good #

Simon Blackburn
Published: 5 May 2000

DEPENDENT RATIONAL ANIMALS. Alasdair MacIntyre. Why human beings need the virtues 172 pp. Duckworth. Pounds 14.95. 0 7156 2902 6


The ideal agents of the great moral philo-sophers make a pretty rum bunch. 

Sometimes, they scarcely have their feet on the ground; sometimes, they are cold and calculating, entering into no bonds except those of contracts forged with an eye to their own advantage. Sometimes, they are rule-bound, sometimes nothing but civil servants, sometimes gushing founts of undiscriminating benevolence. Often, they are magically capable of running their own lives in complete independence both of forces inside themselves, and of other people outside themselves. Aristotle’s appalling “megalopsuchos” or great-souled man comes across as half-way to being autistic, and is in any case unattractive in a way imitated by generations of colonial administrators, and that would be nicely suggested if we translated the word as “big-headed”. Nietzsche’s blonde beast has other problems, probably worse.

In this generous and wise book, Alasdair MacIntyre identifies the problem as that offorgetting the dependencies we all have, one on another. Philosophical fantasies arise because we ignore two connected features of our lives. The first is our animal natures. It is not just that we share a great deal with animals, as everyone knows. It is rather that the distinguishing human features that people often seize upon, such as rationality or the use of language, are not to be set against what remains of the animal in us, as if they were crowning glories of an utterly different kind. The target here is the view that our relation to our biological nature is “external and contingent” in a way that permits a single sharp line to be drawn between human beings and members of non-human species. We are animals through and through, even if bigger than most of them, and more articulate than any of the others. The second, connected feature is our constant vulnerability. At some times of our lives, all of us are dependent on the free care and concern of others, and at all times of our lives we could suddenly be catapulted into such dependency.

Such dependencies require networks of support, in which people give to others not because they expect to receive benefits in return, but simply because the others need what they can give. For such networks to flourish, people need specific traits, such as generosity, justice and gratitude. These are the virtues that enable dependent, animal, beings, such as we are, to live decent human lives together.

Put thus baldly, the theme may sound familiar. In particular, a great deal of feminist writing in recent ethics has emphasized similar points, as MacIntyre acknowledges. But at the very least his work adds a deep and welcome note to the orchestra. MacIntyre is an original and fiercely intelligent philosopher. 

Beyond that, he breathes more than an academic concern about the welfare of animal creation. The book radiates an attractive and rare spirit of generosity, not only to non-human animals, and to the dispossessed and handicapped, but even to fellow philosophers. Like Rosalind Hursthouse’s excellent recent book On Virtue Ethics, it does much to vindicate a broadly Aristotelian approach to the good of all animals, and the virtues needed first to recognize that good, and then to support it.

Other animals than humans have often had a bad deal from philosophers. Descartes is notorious for having supposed them to be unconscious (although in truth he was more agnostic than commonly supposed). In our own time, Donald Davidson argued that they cannot have beliefs, and Heidegger, Gadamer and McDowell have all claimed that “mere”  animals come close to being much as Descartes regarded them. The most we can say apparently is that animals are perceptually responsive to their environments, but it is only by a kind of courtesy that we can say that they really do have experiences of their own. They resemble thermostats as much as persons. Their “experiences”, we are told, do not even contain a factor in common with ours, which is as near as can be to saying they don’t have experiences at all.

MacIntyre gives an extended and reasoned rebuttal of these positions and the arguments on which they depend. Rightly avoiding the idea that there is one big question here, and furthermore one that expects an answer applicable to all animals, from crabs to chimpanzees,

MacIntyre directs us to the multitude of ways in which animal behaviour exhibits spontaneity and intelligence. Somewhat unusually, he concentrates on recent work done with dolphins, showing that they are far from the passive recipients of stimuli from the environment that the thermostat analogy suggests. Dolphins explore and inspect, they recognize the familiar, they play and apprehend and interact. They even recognize absences and sometimes grieve for them. Their social lives include signalling and interpreting each other. 

The sounds they make to each other are not hard-wired, but modified by experience, and they have a remarkable aptitude for learning elements of artificial languages. But, as MacIntyre insists, the interesting question is not whether “dolphins have a language”. The interesting fact is that they have the capacity to act in ways informed by recognition and intention, and carried out in concert with others. MacIntyre acknowledges that, so far as we know, non-human animals lack the capacity to reflect upon their reasons for action. But he agrees with Aquinas that this should not prevent us from thinking that they have reasons for what they do.

So far so good, but human beings do, after all, have the capacity to stand back and reflect and to suppress some concerns, if only because of others. Here MacIntyre relies on an Aristotelian, or perhaps Kantian, vocabulary of capacity for “reason” that threatens to reintroduce the very dualism officially denied by insisting that nothing in our natures is external and contingent to the animal. But he redeems himself by attention to the way the capacity emerges in childhood. Healthy, independent rational agents do not grow on trees. They need to be nurtured in environments that provide support and security and long opportunities for practice. To achieve something more than a slavish concern for the opinion of others, the child needs a figure MacIntyre calls the “ordinary good mother”, who, among other things, educates the child eventually to detach itself from its own impulses, and even from her own apron strings. I would only qualify this by adding that an ordinary good father would seem to me to fit the bill, although

MacIntyre’s discussion has a somewhat psychoanalytic bent, and I am not sure he would agree. But, like Collingwood, and rightly, he insists that it is only if this education is successful that a proper sense of the self can emerge: “I can be said truly to know who and what I am, only because there are others who can be said truly to know who and what I am.”

In the final third of the book, MacIntyre turns to the political dimension of these ideas. Once we are aware of our dependent animal natures, we need no longer feel shame about needing the support of others. We learn to be good givers and good receivers, good guests as well as good hosts. As a communitarian, he looks to the network of groups larger than the family but smaller than the nation state to extend the lattice of relationships of giving and receiving. Politics, he argues, is distorted when it is thought of as the concern only of a minority of professionals. Properly understood, politics is just a facet of ordinary practical reasoning, and goes on in a myriad of the small-scale relationships in which “we” has substituted for “I”.

In my view, MacIntyre’s earlier work, After Virtue, became, at this point, a little preachy and a little too nostalgic for lost small-town cosiness or monastic solidarity. The present work is sharper, and offers no recipes for producing warm local togetherness, as opposed to vicious small-town bigotry. 

But it does succeed in giving a wholly convincing picture of the urgency at least of understanding this task, even if we wilt before the difficulty of accomplishing it. Without this understanding we have no real sense of what humanity means.

It is not possible in a short review to single out the many details that build the sense of conviction this book gives, and there are many of them. At the end, in a wonderfully crafted counterpoint to Nietzsche, MacIntyre talks of “how much is involved in allegiance to a conception of the common good that requires both the virtues of the independent practical reasoner and the virtues of acknowledged dependence”. He insists that this is a good “common to the very young and to the very old, as well as to mature adults, to the paraplegic and to the mentally backward as well as to the athlete and to those engaged in intellectual inquiry, a good that has regard to every vulnerability to which our animal identity and our animal nature, as well as our specifically human condition expose us”. And the role of the philosopher? “It is because and insofar as rational enquiry serves and partly constitutes that common good that it is itself the good that it is.” This is a deep truth, and it is a sombre thought that there are probably few people in the academy, let alone outside, who recognize it.