{\rtf1\ansi \deflang1033\deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\froman \fcharset0 \fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fmodern \fcharset0 \fprq1 Courier New;}{\f2\fswiss \fcharset0 \fprq2 Arial;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;\red128\green0\blue128;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\stylesheet{\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}
{\*\ds1 ;}
{\*\ds2 ;}
{\s3 \qj\fi-720\li720\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _level1;}
{\s4 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _level2;}
{\s5 \qj\fi-720\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _level3;}
{\s6 \qj\fi-720\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _level4;}
{\s7 \qj\fi-720\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _level5;}
{\s8 \qj\fi-720\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _level6;}
{\s9 \qj\fi-720\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _level7;}
{\s10 \qj\fi-720\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _level8;}
{\s11 \qj\fi-720\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _level9;}
{\s12 \qj\fi-720\li720\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levsl1;}
{\s13 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levsl2;}
{\s14 \qj\fi-720\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levsl3;}
{\s15 \qj\fi-720\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levsl4;}
{\s16 \qj\fi-720\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levsl5;}
{\s17 \qj\fi-720\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levsl6;}
{\s18 \qj\fi-720\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levsl7;}
{\s19 \qj\fi-720\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levsl8;}
{\s20 \qj\fi-720\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levsl9;}
{\s21 \qj\fi-720\li720\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levnl1;}
{\s22 \qj\fi-720\li1440\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levnl2;}
{\s23 \qj\fi-720\li2160\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levnl3;}
{\s24 \qj\fi-720\li2880\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levnl4;}
{\s25 \qj\fi-720\li3600\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levnl5;}
{\s26 \qj\fi-720\li4320\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levnl6;}
{\s27 \qj\fi-720\li5040\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levnl7;}
{\s28 \qj\fi-720\li5760\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levnl8;}
{\s29 \qj\fi-720\li6480\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 _levnl9;}
{\s30 Normal;}
{\s31 Definition T;}
{\s32 \qj\li360\tx360\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 Definition L;}
{\*\cs33 \additive\i Definition;}
{\s34 \b\fs48 H1;}
{\s35 \b\fs36 H2;}
{\s36 \b\fs28 H3;}
{\s37 \b H4;}
{\s38 \b\fs20 H5;}
{\s39 \b\fs16 H6;}
{\s40 \i Address;}
{\s41 \qj\li360\ri360\tx360\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640 Blockquote;}
{\*\cs42 \additive\i CITE;}
{\*\cs43 \additive\f1\fs20 CODE;}
{\*\cs44 \additive\i Emphasis;}
{\*\cs45 \additive\ul\cf3 Hyperlink;}
{\*\cs46 \additive\ul\cf4 FollowedHype;}
{\*\cs47 \additive\b\f1\fs20 Keyboard;}
{\s48 \qj\tx0\tx958\tx1917\tx2876\tx3835\tx4794\tx5754\tx6712\tx7671\tx8630\tx9356 \f1\fs20 Preformatted;}
{\s49 \qc \brdrt\brdrdb\brdrw6\brdrcf2 \f2\fs16 zBottom of ;}
{\s50 \qc \brdrb\brdrdb\brdrw6\brdrcf2 \f2\fs16 zTop of For;}
{\*\cs51 \additive\f1 Sample;}
{\*\cs52 \additive\b Strong;}
{\*\cs53 \additive\f1\fs20 Typewriter;}
{\*\cs54 \additive\i Variable;}
{\*\cs55 \additive\v \additive\v\cf5 HTML Markup;}
{\*\cs56 \additive \additive Comment;}
{\*\cs57 \additive\ul\cf3 SYS_HYPERTEXT;}
}\ftnrstcont\notabind\margl1440\margr1440\hyphhotz936\ftnbj\fet2\ftnrstcont\aftnnar\viewkind1\lytprtmet\subfontbysize \sectd \sbknone\pgndec\headery1440\footery1440 
{\footer {
\posxc\nowrap \plain \fs24 {\field{\*\fldinst { PAGE  }}}\par}
\par}
{\*\pnseclvl1\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl2\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcrm\pnstart1{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl7\pndec\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1}

{\field{\*\fldinst {\lang4105  SEQ CHAPTER \\h \\r 1}}{\fldrslt }}\pard \fs24\qc 
{\plain \fs24 }{\plain \fs24 \b Ethics as Philosophy:\par
}\pard \fs24\qc 
{\plain \fs24 \b A Defense of Ethical Nonnaturalism}{\plain \fs24 \par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \par
}\pard \fs24\qc 
{\plain \fs24 \par
}\pard \fs24\sl480\slmult1 
{\plain \fs24 It is early days in the }{\plain \fs24 \i Principia Ethica }{\plain \fs24 when Moore presents us with his famous argument from \softline
elimination on behalf of ethical nonnaturalism. Moore thought that there were three options \softline
when it came to a diagnosis of ethical concepts. Ethical notions are either meaningless, \softline
susceptible of a naturalistic analysis, or nonnatural. Neither of the first two options appealed. \softline
Ethical nonnaturalism won by default.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab It took only a long generation before nonnaturalism{\u8217\'92}s star began to fade. The ascendancy \softline
of noncognitivist views, and the resurgence of naturalistic ones, were prompted by the \softline
perception that nonnaturalism suffered from fatal flaws. By century{\u8217\'92}s end, this perception had \softline
become so widespread as to be rightly considered a bit of conventional philosophical wisdom. I \softline
think that this critical, and often dismissive, attitude is mistaken{\u8211\'96}as mistaken as Moore{\u8217\'92}s \softline
contention that he had identified a line of argument that proved, once and for all, the falsity of \softline
ethical naturalism.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab It is a commonplace that philosophical preferences are cyclical, and that the runt of the \softline
litter in one era may elbow out its competition in later times. Ethical nonnaturalism, for decades \softline
consigned to second-class status, is due a re-appraisal.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The nonnaturalism I favor is a brand of moral realism. As I understand it, moral realism \softline
is the view that says that most moral judgments are beliefs, some of which are true, and, when \softline
true, are so by virtue of correctly representing the existence of truth-makers for their respective \softline
contents. Further, and crucially, true moral judgments are made true in some way other than by \softline
virtue of the attitudes taken towards their content by any actual or idealized human agent. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab Not all nonnaturalisms are realistic{\u8211\'96}Kantian views, for instance, reject the assimilation \softline
of moral to natural properties, and yet also reject realism. I will proceed on the assumption \softline
(unargued here) that realism is the best path for nonnaturalists.{}{\plain \fs24 \super 1{\footnote \pard \fs24\sa240 
{\plain \fs24 \super 1}{}{\plain \fs24   I argue against alternatives to realism in Part I of }{\plain \fs24 \i Moral Realism: A Defence }{\plain \fs24 (Oxford: \softline
Clarendon Press, 2003). Many of the ideas that appear in this essay receive much fuller \softline
development in that book. I have also appropriated a couple of sentences from my }{\plain \fs24 \i Whatever \softline
Happened to Good and Evil? }{\plain \fs24 (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004). My thanks to the \softline
Press for permission to rely on this material here.}}}
}{\plain \fs24  After describing nonnaturalism, \softline
and identifying the most serious worries that face it, I will undertake a partial defense against a \softline
number of those problems. My preferred strategy for doing so invokes a parallel between \softline
philosophy in general, and ethics in particular. My contention is that once we pay special \softline
attention to this relationship, a number of the traditional concerns about nonnaturalism begin to \softline
seem less pressing than they have for a long while.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b I. The Nature of Nonnaturalism}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Ethical nonnaturalism is, first and foremost, a metaphysical doctrine. It claims that there are \softline
instantiated moral properties that are not natural properties.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab There are instantiated moral properties: this element distinguishes nonnaturalism from all \softline
forms of moral nihilism.{}{\plain \fs24 \super 2{\footnote \pard \fs24\sa240 
{\plain \fs24 \super 2}{}{\plain \fs24  The following, in my book, all qualify as versions of nihilism: emotivism (e.g., Ayer \softline
1936; Stevenson 1937, 1948), prescriptivism (Hare 1952, 1963), expressivism (Blackburn 1993, \softline
1998; Gibbard 1990), assertoric nondescriptivism (Timmons 1999, Skorupski 1999), and error \softline
theories (Mackie 1977; Garner 1994; Joyce 2001).}}}
}{\plain \fs24  Moral nihilism is the view that either there are no moral properties, or \softline
there are, but none that are ever instantiated. On this view, there is no moral reality at all. \softline
Nonnaturalism asserts the existence of moral properties{\u8211\'96}there really is such a thing as being 
(e.g.) morally forbidden, or morally good{\u8211\'96}and asserts, too, that these properties are sometimes \softline
exemplified.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Nonnaturalism }{\plain \fs24 \i per se }{\plain \fs24 is, in two respects, neutral as to the exact nature of moral \softline
properties. It is first of all ecumenical regarding the conditions under which these properties are \softline
instantiated. Many substantive normative ethical theories are compatible with a nonnaturalistic \softline
metaphysics. And, second, nonnaturalism is compatible with any number of specific views about \softline
what a property is. Nonnaturalists can await a verdict from the metaphysicians on this question, \softline
and incorporate their best answer into a comprehensive metaethic.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Ethical nonnaturalism is true only if moral properties are not natural properties. There is \softline
no agreement on what makes a property a natural one. The criteria that immediately come to \softline
mind{\u8211\'96}a property is natural in virtue of its being instantiated nonconventionally, materially, or \softline
tangibly, or being describable without reliance on evaluative vocabulary{\u8211\'96}will not do. If \softline
nonnaturalists are right, then morality is not conventional. That doesn{\u8217\'92}t make them naturalists. \softline
Some paradigmatically natural properties are realized nonmaterially (e.g., being a vacuum). Not \softline
every realization of a natural property is tangible{\u8211\'96}one can{\u8217\'92}t literally touch a muon or a gluon. \softline
And, as Nicholas Sturgeon rightly points out in a recent essay (2003), one can{\u8217\'92}t always tell a \softline
natural property by the vocabulary in which it is described. If naturalists are correct, then moral \softline
worth, virtue and rightness are natural properties, though all are surely also evaluative notions. \softline
The debate between naturalists and nonnaturalists cannot be solved just by noting salient \softline
features of the terms we use to describe it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab I suggest that we take a different tack, that of offering a disciplinary conception. The \softline
natural is whatever is the object of study by the natural sciences. The obvious problem of having 
just pushed the definitional problem back a step is usually solved by defining the natural \softline
sciences ostensively: something is natural just in case it figures ineliminably in true propositions \softline
that emerge from (on some accounts, the perfected versions of) physics, chemistry, molecular \softline
biology, astronomy, etc. Leave astrology off that list. Film studies, too. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab It would be nice to have an account of what makes a natural science natural. This for two \softline
reasons. First, we{\u8217\'92}ll want to know how to fill in that {\u8216\'91}etc.{\u8217\'92}, especially for contentious cases. And \softline
ethics is likely to be among the most contentious. But, second, we presumably don{\u8217\'92}t want to \softline
limit the natural domain to the things studied by (even perfected versions of) the sciences we \softline
now recognize{\u8211\'96}we want to allow for the emergence of natural sciences that we haven{\u8217\'92}t yet \softline
dreamed of.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab I don{\u8217\'92}t think that ethics is a natural science. Its fundamental principles are not inductive \softline
generalizations. It is not primarily concerned with causal efficacy. Its central principles are not \softline
descriptive of historical contingencies. The phenomena it does describe is supervenient as a \softline
matter of conceptual requirement. It allows for a much greater degree of indeterminacy and \softline
vagueness than is found in typical natural sciences. It has only a very little concern for \softline
mathematical quantification and precision. Unlike any of the recognized sciences, its truths are \softline
normative truths that direct and guide, rather than (in the first instance) predict the course of \softline
future events or explain what has already occurred. Moral truths provide justifying reasons that \softline
are often ignored. Physics and geology and hydrology don{\u8217\'92}t do that.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Of course, ethical naturalism may be correct even if ethics is not a science. Ethical \softline
naturalism is true so long as moral properties are the proper object of natural scientific study. \softline
They might be, even if ethics isn{\u8217\'92}t the science that does the studying.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab But if ethics isn{\u8217\'92}t the relevant science, then what is? Sociology and psychology, if we \softline
admit them into the pantheon, might do yeoman{\u8217\'92}s work{\u8211\'96}they will be required to aid us, for \softline
instance, in determining how many people are made happy by various actions, or what it was \softline
that actually motivated agents to do what they did. All quite helpful information. But neither \softline
sociology nor psychology, nor any other science that I know of, will do much to fix the content \softline
of our fundamental moral principles. That is the job of ethics proper.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Suppose my truncated case against the scientific status of ethics is way off-base. So let us \softline
grant, provisionally, that ethics is a science. Still, is it a natural science? We might, for instance, \softline
also allow mathematics to qualify as a science. But not many think of it as a natural science. \softline
What explains this, it seems to me, is the nature of mathematical investigation. Mathematics is \softline
done in a largely }{\plain \fs24 \i a priori }{\plain \fs24 fashion. And this leads us to the following thought: a science is a \softline
natural science just in case its fundamental principles are discoverable }{\plain \fs24 \i a posteriori}{\plain \fs24 , through \softline
reliance primarily on empirical evidence. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Any definition of naturalism is bound to be to some extent stipulative. Yet this \softline
characterization is true to all instances of avowed ethical naturalism that I know of, and does \softline
seem to capture what many have thought to be essential to the classification. But notice, now, \softline
that the difference between naturalists and nonnaturalists, usually taken to be a metaphysical \softline
one, turns out on this accounting to be epistemological. Ethical nonnaturalists are those who \softline
claim that moral properties are not natural ones. This means, on the present understanding, that \softline
fundamental moral truths are discoverable }{\plain \fs24 \i a priori}{\plain \fs24 . If I am right, prospects for nonnaturalism \softline
depend crucially on the possibility of gaining such knowledge.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab It isn{\u8217\'92}t my intention here to offer a direct defense of }{\plain \fs24 \i a priori }{\plain \fs24 moral knowledge.{}{\plain \fs24 \super 3{\footnote \pard \fs24\sa240 
{\plain \fs24 \super 3}{}{\plain \fs24  I offer a somewhat programmatic defense in }{\plain \fs24 \i Moral Realism}{\plain \fs24 , ch. 11. See also Audi \softline
1997, 1999, 2004, and the fine collection edited by Stratton-Lake (2002).}}}
}{\plain \fs24  Instead, I \softline
will present some ancillary arguments that constitute an invitation to see ethical inquiry as \softline
importantly dissimilar from empirical, natural scientific investigation. The rationale and the \softline
structure of these supporting arguments is best appreciated by noting the classical objections to \softline
nonnaturalism.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b II. Objections to Nonnaturalism}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Many have opposed ethical nonnaturalism just because they have thought }{\plain \fs24 \i a priori }{\plain \fs24 moral \softline
knowledge an impossibility. Scientific confirmation is our model of epistemic success; if \softline
morality fails to conform to the model, the only alternative (it has seemed) is moral skepticism. \softline
Before I sketch my preferred path to resisting this conclusion, we must consider other potent \softline
objections to nonnaturalism.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The first of these is motivational: moral judgments are thought to bear a necessary \softline
connection with motivation. But if nonnaturalists are right, then moral judgments represent \softline
efforts to report on the instantiations of nonnatural properties. How could such (putative) reports \softline
necessarily engage the will?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The second worry focuses on practical reasons. Many believe that our moral obligations \softline
constitute or entail categorical reasons, i.e., reasons that apply independently of our inclinations. \softline
But how could the instantiations of nonnatural properties supply such reasons? Our reasons \softline
stem, ultimately, from what each of us most cares about. But the link between our existing 
concerns, and nonnatural properties, will be tenuous, at best. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab A third concern is metaphysical: if moral properties are not natural properties, then what \softline
can they be? Everything }{\plain \fs24 \i else}{\plain \fs24  we know of in the universe is (potentially) scientifically explicable. \softline
Nonnaturalism insists on a class of }{\plain \fs24 \i sui generis}{\plain \fs24  properties, and this (it is said) amounts to \softline
ontological profligacy.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Next comes the epistemological concern. If scientific methods don{\u8217\'92}t answer moral \softline
questions, then how are they to be answered? For nonnaturalists, this problem has always taken a \softline
quite specific form. Nonnaturalists, by definition, deny the identity of moral and natural \softline
properties. They are also agreed that, for any moral and natural property, there are no relations of \softline
necessary coextension that link them.{}{\plain \fs24 \super 4{\footnote \pard \fs24\sa240 
{\plain \fs24 \super 4}{}{\plain \fs24  I don{\u8217\'92}t believe that this is a defining feature of nonnaturalism, but it is a claim that all \softline
nonnaturalists I am familiar with have endorsed. Of course, if necessary coextension entailed \softline
identity, then such aversion is readily explicable. But that entailment fails, or so I believe. Being \softline
self-identical and being either red or not red are necessarily coextensive properties. They aren{\u8217\'92}t \softline
identical. Being a plane figure with a side and being one with an angle are also necessarily \softline
coextensive. But being an angle is not the same thing as being a side. (For the contrary view, see \softline
Jackson 1998: 126-7.)}}}
}{\plain \fs24  There is no way to fill in the following blank: necessarily, \softline
something is good [right/virtuous/praiseworthy, etc.] if and only if it is _____ [fill in a term \softline
designating a natural property]. In the absence of the relevant biconditionals, it is easy to see \softline
how we might be epistemically confounded. If we don{\u8217\'92}t know the natural conditions under \softline
which moral properties are invariably instantiated, then it is hard to know when they are \softline
instantiated at all. That is precisely the epistemic problem facing nonnaturalism.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The epistemological problem is very closely related to the last significant problem for \softline
nonnaturalism{\u8211\'96}that of explaining persistent moral disagreement. When we compare the \softline
plausibility of two hypotheses introduced to account for such disagreement{\u8211\'96}(i) some parties are 
misapprehending the relations linking nonnatural and natural properties, or (ii) the interlocutors \softline
are giving voice to parochial commitments they{\u8217\'92}ve been raised and socialized to accept{\u8211\'96}the \softline
simpler explanation has always seemed to be the latter. Rather than attributing some cognitive \softline
failing(s) to people involved in moral disagreements, we do better to see such cases as \softline
exemplifying what Mackie has called {\u8220\'93}patterns of objectification.{\u8221\'94} (1977: 42ff.) The reason, of \softline
course, is that citing cognitive failings in this context is plausible only in the presence of a \softline
successful moral epistemology that provides epistemic standards for measuring such failings. \softline
And that is just what we don{\u8217\'92}t have. Why invoke }{\plain \fs24 \i sui generis}{\plain \fs24  properties when familiar kinds of \softline
projection can do the trick?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab These longstanding worries are legitimate and serious. There is obviously no practicable \softline
way to reply to all of them here. Since that is so, I will simply summarize my preferred direction \softline
of argument for some cases, and then devote the rest of the paper to the general strategy that I \softline
think, with development, can lead to satisfying solutions for the remainder of the worries.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab I{\u8217\'92}ll take a pass here on the first two problems.  My explanation for this in the case of the \softline
motivational problem is that it is, as traditionally conceived, a difficulty equally for any \softline
cognitivist. Cognitivists see moral judgments as truth-evaluable beliefs, as intended efforts to \softline
report on the nature of a moral reality. If, as Hume claims, beliefs of any stripe are unable to \softline
motivate all by themselves, then every cognitivist view (ideal-observer theories, varieties of \softline
relativism and subjectivism, sensibility theories, Kantian views and the miscellany of moral \softline
realisms) will fall to the ax. I don{\u8217\'92}t think any argument can be that powerful. In any event, \softline
nothing about nonnaturalism }{\plain \fs24 \i per se}{\plain \fs24  makes it any more vulnerable to this worry than any of its \softline
competitors in the cognitivist camp.\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab There are two ways to defend against the motivational argument. The first is to argue that \softline
beliefs{\u8211\'96}especially evaluative ones{\u8211\'96}are capable of motivating all by themselves, or, by \softline
themselves, are able to generate derived desires that together yield motivation. The second is to \softline
deny that moral judgments necessarily motivate, and to provide an explanation for why such \softline
judgments, when sincerely held, nevertheless do manage to motivate as often as they do. I think \softline
that both strategies can be successfully brought off, though obviously not here.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab I have a different basis for avoiding any discussion of the worries regarding practical \softline
reason. Here, some of realism{\u8217\'92}s cognitivist competitors }{\plain \fs24 \i are}{\plain \fs24  at an advantage. Specifically, all of \softline
those who make our moral duties some function of our attitudes can readily explain why we \softline
have reason to do what morality requires of us. It takes a lot more work to show that \softline
realists{\u8211\'96}naturalists }{\plain \fs24 \i or}{\plain \fs24  nonnaturalists{\u8211\'96}can do as good a job of explaining morality{\u8217\'92}s normativity.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The typical realist response to these charges is to deny that moral obligations do in fact \softline
entail reasons for action. Sometimes we may lack any reason to do as morality demands. The \softline
standards that specify the content of our moral obligations do not have their source in human \softline
attitudes; reasons do; therefore there can be the relevant disconnect. My way out of this problem \softline
begins by insisting that moral duties }{\plain \fs24 \i do}{\plain \fs24  entail excellent practical reasons, but proceeds to deny \softline
that such reasons must be reachable from sound deliberation that starts from our existing \softline
commitments. I don{\u8217\'92}t see any short way of substantiating these points, however, and I don{\u8217\'92}t \softline
expect anyone just to take my word that successful solutions to these problems are possible.{}{\plain \fs24 \super 5{\footnote \pard \fs24\sa240 
{\plain \fs24 \super 5}{}{\plain \fs24  I address the motivational problems in Part III, and the worries to do with practical \softline
reason in Part IV, of }{\plain \fs24 \i Moral Realism}{\plain \fs24 .}}}
}{\plain \fs24  \softline
Instead, I suggest that we bracket these concerns at this point. Even if my promissory notes can 
be adequately cashed, that still leaves plenty of other problems for the nonnaturalist realist to \softline
deal with.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b III. Ethics as Philosophy}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Ethics is a branch of philosophy. Few would dispute that. Yet this fact has significant, wide-ranging implications, many of which have gone little noticed in debates about the status of \softline
ethical judgments. My central claim is that there are very close parallels between ethical \softline
investigation and that pursued in philosophy quite generally. These parallels provide excellent \softline
reason for rejecting some of the main lines of criticism just rehearsed. They also generate \softline
positive reasons to favor nonnaturalism over its competitors.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab I locate the central claim within a central argument. Here it is:\par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 1. Ethics is a species of inquiry; philosophy is its genus.\par
}{\plain \fs24 2. A species inherits the essential traits of its genus.\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-720\li720 
{\plain \fs24 3. There are (among others) two essential traits of philosophy: the realistic status of its truths, \softline
and its status as something other than a natural science.\par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 4. Therefore nonnaturalistic ethical realism is true.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}\pard \fs24\sl480\slmult1 
{\plain \fs24 \tab In what follows, I will try to make the first premise plausible. I{\u8217\'92}ll just assume the truth of \softline
premise (2). As for (3), I will say something (but not nearly enough) to defend the claim that \softline
philosophy is something other than a natural science. I will say a good deal more about why we \softline
should construe philosophical truths realistically.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab To see ethics as philosophy is to appreciate a certain kind and degree of methodological \softline
similarity. Let me start with an admission: I don't have a nice, precise characterization to offer of \softline
the philosophical method. In large part, I think philosophy is distinguished from other disciplines \softline
as much by the questions it asks as by the methods it uses to pursue their answers. We know 
philosophy when we see it, and can distinguish it, in practice, fairly easily from any of the \softline
disciplines whose lines sometimes blur into its territory (religious studies, anthropology, \softline
economics, psychology, sociology, etc.).\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab To get an approximation of what it is to pursue a philosophical question, consider what \softline
would have to happen in order to answer the question of whether there are universals. First, we'd \softline
have to remove ambiguities and fix our subject, so as to avoid talking past one another. Then we \softline
would have to gather and bring forward any empirical evidence that was thought to be relevant \softline
to determining an answer to our question. We would have a careful look at arguments already on \softline
offer, both from those whose views are largely in sync with our own, and the best of our critics. \softline
We would test our claims for logical consistency, and decide, in the face of contradiction, which \softline
of our competing views is least well supported. And we would have to investigate to see whether \softline
ours, among competitors, best exemplifies a host of theoretical virtues--economy, stability across \softline
cases, avoidance of ad hoc assumptions, preservation of existing beliefs, explanatory breadth, \softline
etc.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Every single stage of this process is fraught with controversy, since all but the second \softline
(that of obtaining relevant facts) primarily involves philosophical exploration. {\u8216\'91}Universal{\u8217\'92} is not \softline
univocal. The appraisal of a sympathetic argument, as well as a critic's challenges, is no less a \softline
philosophical task. The consistency of one's views isn't always transparent. The comparative \softline
assessment of whether one view best exemplifies a theoretical virtue is often a very tangled \softline
affair, and in any event is not to be resolved by appealing exclusively to the evidence of the \softline
senses.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab So far as I can tell, things are just the same when it comes to ethical investigation. When 
there is a disagreement, for instance, about the morality of abortion, we must first ensure that we \softline
are not talking past one another. We have to settle on the meaning of the relevant terms (e.g., \softline
what it is to be human, or a person), so that we are on the same page. We must gain the relevant \softline
nonmoral facts. We have to advance a view that is internally consistent, or amend it so as to \softline
make it so. We try out the best of our arguments against the competition, and vice versa, and \softline
make changes accordingly. We see whether our view best comports with a battery of theoretical \softline
virtues. And, finally, the ultimate resolution of the issue is not to be decided solely or even \softline
primarily by direct appeal to empirical evidence. We rely on such evidence to tell us what is the \softline
case. To know what ought to be the case, we need to push farther. That is not, in the first \softline
instance, an empirical matter.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Philosophy is not primarily an empirical discipline, but an }{\plain \fs24 \i a priori}{\plain \fs24  one. Its truths are \softline
ordinarily discoverable, when they are, not exclusively by appeal to what our senses can tell us. \softline
We don't bump into such things as universals, free will, or modalities; we can't see them, or hear \softline
or touch them. We may have reason to deny the existence of such things, but not because we \softline
aren't sure what they taste like. Dismissing such things from our ontology, or ratifying their \softline
inclusion in it, is something that no scientist is able to do. Such things are dealt with in an }{\plain \fs24 \i a \softline
priori }{\plain \fs24 way.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab At this point I{\u8217\'92}d like to invoke another of my promissory notes. Substantiating the claim \softline
that fundamental philosophical truths are }{\plain \fs24 \i a priori }{\plain \fs24 is work for a paper unto itself (at the least)}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
This isn{\u8217\'92}t that paper. Yet this claim about philosophy, while contentious, isn{\u8217\'92}t on the face of it \softline
that implausible. Of course there are those who deny the very possibility or existence of }{\plain \fs24 \i a priori}{\plain \fs24  \softline
knowledge. }{\plain \fs24 But for all others, basic philosophical principles should be quite attractive 
candidates. }{\plain \fs24 Philosophy must run a close second to mathematics as an exemplar of an }{\plain \fs24 \i a priori \softline
}{\plain \fs24 discipline (if indeed there are any such exemplars). Part of this is explicable by reference to the \softline
metaphysically or conceptually necessary status of the principles that are the object of \softline
philosophical investigation. And part of this is explicable by reflection on cases. Consider for a \softline
moment Leibniz{\u8217\'92}s law of the indiscernibility of identicals, or the modal principle that anything \softline
that is necessary is possibly necessary. These certainly don{\u8217\'92}t seem to be inductive \softline
generalizations, or conclusions of inferences to the best explanation. The role of sensory \softline
evidence in establishing such claims is peripheral, at best. I might be mistaken about this, and \softline
nothing to come will absolutely protect against this possibility. But the view that makes the \softline
justification of such principles a matter of empirical confirmation is (much) more contentious \softline
than the one I am prepared to rely on.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab As ethics is a branch of philosophy, we have excellent reason to think that fundamental \softline
ethical principles share the same status as fundamental philosophical principles. When we want \softline
to know whether something is right or wrong, admirable or vicious, we will certainly want to \softline
know what's going on in the world. The evidence of our senses may tell us that happiness has \softline
been maximized, or that the words of a promise have been uttered, but that's only the beginning, \softline
not the end, of our ethical investigations. When trying to verify the basic standards that govern \softline
the application of moral predicates, we will only secondarily (if at all) advert to what the \softline
physicists and botanists and hydrologists say. The conditions under which actions are right, and \softline
motives and characters good, aren{\u8217\'92}t confirmed by the folks with lab coats. They are confirmed, \softline
if at all, by those who think philosophically. And much of that thinking, especially when focused \softline
on non-derivative, core principles, is undertaken without clear reliance on what we can see, or 
hear, or touch.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Since doing ethics is doing a kind of philosophy, we shouldn't be surprised at the \softline
similarities just mentioned. But these similarities can insulate nonnaturalism from some of the \softline
standard critical charges, enumerated above in Part II. In what follows, I will rely on the \softline
parallels between the species (ethics) and its genus (philosophy) in a way that aids nonnaturalist \softline
realists in answering three of the most pressing objections against their views.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The first objection says that the intractability of ethical disagreement sustains an \softline
antirealist diagnosis of ethical thought and talk. The second criticism claims that this \softline
disagreement in any event undermines any justified belief we may have for our moral views, \softline
provided that they are meant to tell us about how the world really is. The third asserts that the \softline
causal inefficacy of moral facts provides excellent reason to deny their existence. Note that \softline
success in refuting such criticisms is still short of a complete defense against the metaphysical \softline
and epistemological objections I outlined above. But the criticisms I discuss are some of the \softline
most important elements of these families of objections, and I think that they can be met. That is \softline
work enough for a day, if it can be accomplished.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b IV. Moral Disagreement as a Metaphysical Objection}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Nonnaturalism stands for the idea that there are nonscientific moral properties. But if there are \softline
such things, why is there so much disagreement about them? Many believe that objective \softline
properties of any kind must be such as to garner consensus about (the conditions of) their \softline
instantiation, at least among people who are well situated to appreciate such things. But it \softline
doesn{\u8217\'92}t take an expert to realize that such consensus is extremely elusive in ethics. So persistent 
moral disagreement presents us with a choice. Perhaps there are no moral properties at all. Or \softline
there are, but ones that are not objective{\u8211\'96}rather, they are constituted by partial or parochial \softline
human attitudes. As such, the conditions of their instantiation, and the instantiations themselves, \softline
would presumably be empirically verifiable, at least in principle. Either way, the nonnaturalist \softline
loses.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab There are really two ways to run this skeptical argument, though they usually remain \softline
entangled in the literature. One is as an argument that seeks to draw an inference to the best \softline
explanation, the explananda being the scope of actual ethical disagreement we see in our world. \softline
The second is as an }{\plain \fs24 \i a priori }{\plain \fs24 argument, that has us anticipating persistent disagreement even \softline
among hypothetical, idealized moral deliberators. In both cases, the presence of intractable \softline
disagreement is said to be sufficient to draw an antirealist conclusion: there are no real, objective \softline
moral standards that could serve as guideposts to our moral investigations. In ethics, we make it \softline
all up.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The first version of the argument, as an inference to the best explanation, is inconclusive \softline
at best. Certainly there is intractable moral disagreement{\u8211\'96}plenty of it. But just as surely, such \softline
disagreement might be well explained as a product of insufficient nonmoral information, or \softline
adequate information insufficiently "processed." Such processing failures cover a wide range of \softline
cases, from errors of instrumental reasoning, to a failure of nerve, sympathy, empathy or \softline
imagination. One explanation (not the only one) of these errors is that there's typically much \softline
more personally at stake in ethical matters than in scientific ones, and these stakes tend to \softline
introduce biasing factors that skew correct perception. It may be that for any given real-world \softline
ethical disagreement, we could cite at least one of these failings as an explanation for its 
continued existence.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab I think that one{\u8217\'92}s expectations of (lack of) consensus is largely an expression of one's \softline
antecedent metaethical commitments, rather than anything that could serve as an independent  \softline
argument in this context. Imagine away all of the failings mentioned in the previous paragraph: \softline
will there or won't there be any disagreement left to threaten moral realism? I{\u8217\'92}m not sure. If not, \softline
then the realist can rest easy. But suppose disagreement persists, even in the counterfactual \softline
situation in which we rid our agents of the flaws that impede correct moral reasoning. Even here, \softline
however, realists can sustain their view with a minimum of damage. They will have to say that \softline
impeccable reasoning may nevertheless fail to land on the truth. There can be a gap between \softline
epistemic accessibility and truth. If we are to posit an absence of consensus even among \softline
perfected inquirers, then the idealized picture of moral inquirers will fail to guard against their \softline
fallibility. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab At this point we can introduce the ethics-philosophy parallel and use it to defend \softline
nonnaturalism from the argument from disagreement. The breadth and depth of philosophical \softline
disagreement is just as great as that found within ethics (perhaps greater). There{\u8217\'92}s still no \softline
consensus on the merits of compatibilism, the analysis of knowledge, or the relation of the \softline
mental and the physical. Nor is there broad agreement about which methods are needed to \softline
unequivocally confirm the right answers for us.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab If the intractability of disagreement in an area is best explained by antirealist \softline
assumptions about its status, then we must be global philosophical antirealists. The judgments \softline
we render, and the arguments we offer on their behalf, must all be seen either as incapable of \softline
truth, as expressions of conative commitments only, or as claims whose truth is contingent on 
personal or interpersonal endorsement. But that{\u8217\'92}s not a very plausible take on the status of our \softline
philosophical views. There is a truth{\u8211\'96}a real, objective truth{\u8211\'96}about whether the mental is \softline
identical to the physical, or about whether certain kinds of freedom are compatible with \softline
determinism. Once we are sure of our terms and concepts, the judgments that affirm or deny the \softline
existence of such things are literally either true or false, in as robust a sense as we can imagine. \softline
We don{\u8217\'92}t have the final say about the truth of such judgments, and the content of these \softline
judgments is indeed something other than whatever conative or practical commitments \softline
contingently accompany them. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab I invite you to reflect on the status of the philosophical judgments you hold most dear, \softline
and have worked most carefully to defend. Do you imagine that your views, and their supporting \softline
arguments, are either untrue, or possessed of only the sort of minimal truth that is attainable by \softline
having been sincerely endorsed from within a parochial perspective? No matter how skeptical \softline
you might be about some alleged philosophical entities (universals, free will, or moral facts), \softline
you presumably take your confident opinions about such matters as having registered a real \softline
truth, one that is a function neither of your attitudes towards it, nor of the language you have \softline
used to comprehend it. That truth, you believe, is independent of the circle you inhabit, the \softline
agreements you{\u8217\'92}ve entered, the conventions you are part of, and the era in which you find \softline
yourself.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab And yet one{\u8217\'92}s philosophical views are bound to be as controversial as one{\u8217\'92}s ethical \softline
views. Disagreements in core (and peripheral) philosophical areas are apparently intractable. \softline
Empirical evidence hasn{\u8217\'92}t yet been able to solve any major philosophical problem, and any \softline
prediction that it someday might is as likely to divide philosophers as any other philosophical 
question. If intractable disagreement about verdicts and methods is enough to warrant an \softline
antirealist diagnosis of an area, then the whole of philosophy must be demoted. That simply is \softline
implausible: there really is (or isn{\u8217\'92}t) such a thing as probabilistic causation, numbers without \softline
spatio-temporal location, actions that are both free and determined, etc. My say-so doesn{\u8217\'92}t make \softline
it so. Neither does anyone else{\u8217\'92}s.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The philosophical stance that denies the existence of nonnatural moral properties is itself \softline
the subject of intractable disagreement. If such disagreement is sufficient to undermine the \softline
realistic status of the controversial judgments, then the views of the ethical naturalist or moral \softline
antirealist cannot be objectively correct. They are either untrue, or are true reports of the \softline
attitudes they themselves take toward nonnaturalism, or are noncognitive expressions that reflect \softline
their own practical commitments. If they are }{\plain \fs24 \i any }{\plain \fs24 of those things, then they cannot rationally \softline
command the allegiance of their detractors. Nonnaturalists needn{\u8217\'92}t be making any error when \softline
rejecting such views.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The alternative is to see our beliefs about such matters as aspiring to, and possibly \softline
succeeding in, representing a philosophical reality not of our own making. This reality is \softline
constituted by a set of truths whose alethic status is independent of our endorsement of their \softline
content. And this despite the presence of intractable philosophical disagreement.}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Of course, one might say that were we free of the shortcomings that best all of us actual \softline
inquirers, we would converge on a set of philosophical claims about free will, causation, etc. \softline
The disputes that seem to us so intractable would vanish with more information, more efficient \softline
and comprehensive application of that information, etc. That may be so. But then we have every \softline
reason to render the same verdict in the ethical case. Since ethics is a branch of philosophy, it 
would be very surprising to come to any other conclusion.}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab In other words, even if, at the end of the day, there is (much) more disagreement within \softline
ethics than there is in science, this is hardly probative evidence for the falsity of nonnaturalism. \softline
For there is just as likely to be (much) more disagreement in philosophy generally than there is \softline
in science. That doesn{\u8217\'92}t license a verdict of global philosophical antirealism. It certainly doesn{\u8217\'92}t \softline
license us in the claim that philosophy is a natural science. So long as it is true (as almost every \softline
working philosopher presupposes) that there is an objectively correct view about central \softline
philosophical puzzles, then we have just as much reason to accord the same status to ethical \softline
matters. We will have our opinions about such matters, but they are ultimately answerable to a \softline
truth not of our own making. Things are no different in ethics.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b V. Moral Disagreement as an Epistemic Defeater}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 For any nontrivial moral view one holds, there are bound to be others who disagree with it. This \softline
very fact is probably not enough to undermine any epistemic justification one may have for the \softline
belief. One might, after all, be unaware of the disagreement, and this ignorance might be non-culpable. Yet what of the ordinary situation, where we realize that our own moral views fail to \softline
command universal allegiance? Suppose not only that you know of such disagreement, but that \softline
you also rightly believe that your opponents, reasoning correctly from their own incompatible \softline
but justified beliefs, will never come over to your side. What does that do to the status of your \softline
own beliefs?\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab As I see it, such awareness does not, by itself, constitute a defeater of one{\u8217\'92}s views. It does \softline
not entail that one ought to suspend judgment about what one believes. For one may well 
think{\u8211\'96}and this is the usual case{\u8211\'96}that one has justifying reasons that the other is failing to \softline
appreciate. That she is reasoning impeccably from her own starting points does not mean that \softline
her beliefs must be true, for her starting points may be way off-base. And, as you will see things, \softline
they almost certainly are.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Surely it is possible that any defense you offer of your contested views will invoke other \softline
beliefs that are as controversial as the ones you are intending to support. In fact, this happens all \softline
the time in moral discussions. Perhaps, for many such cases, there is nothing one can do but beg \softline
the question. And question-begging arguments never confer justification.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab There are two things to say here. First, one{\u8217\'92}s belief might continue to be justified, even if \softline
defending it to others has one begging questions. A belief{\u8217\'92}s justification is distinct from an \softline
agent{\u8217\'92}s ability to justify it to others. So long as the belief was initially justified, it is possible that \softline
its justification survives, despite an agent{\u8217\'92}s inability to advance considerations that an audience \softline
finds compelling. (Someone rightly convinced that tomatoes are fruits might be justified in her \softline
belief, even if she{\u8217\'92}s unable to bring others around to the idea.) }{\plain \fs24 Second, there is excellent reason \softline
to believe that the presence of another{\u8217\'92}s incompatible, justified belief }{\plain \fs24 doesn{\u8217\'92}t always undermine \softline
justification; indeed, there might even be a case for thinking that question-begging arguments \softline
can supply positive justification for one{\u8217\'92}s contested beliefs.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab We can see this with the help of series of examples. Suppose that you are engaged in \softline
conversation with a principled fanatic. He thinks that the fundamental ethical imperative is to \softline
gain power over others; everything else is subsidiary to this primary goal. Any argument you \softline
offer for beneficence is bound to be treated as the product of an effective brainwashing. Nothing \softline
you can say will convince him. Moreover, suppose that he{\u8217\'92}s not contradicting himself, and isn{\u8217\'92}t 
making any false empirical claims to support his ultimate principle. In the context of your \softline
conversation, you are bound to beg the question.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab But you might be justified in your beliefs anyway. For the presence of an intelligent, \softline
consistent and indefatigable opponent does not necessarily undermine a belief that one is \softline
otherwise justified in holding. This is a general point. It holds for one{\u8217\'92}s ethical views, but also \softline
for perceptual, memorial and philosophical ones, as well.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab To simplify, consider a case in which one{\u8217\'92}s perceptual beliefs later form the basis of a \softline
memorial belief. I saw and remember talking to my hated nemesis Smith the moment before he \softline
made that fatal misstep that no one else witnessed. I try to convince others of what I have seen, \softline
and am met with disbelief. Let{\u8217\'92}s add that my relations with Smith are well known. That others \softline
have excellent reason to doubt my word is compatible with my original belief, and its memorial \softline
descendant, both being highly justified. In this case, not only do the incompatible, well-justified \softline
beliefs of others fail to undermine my justification, but my own question-begging attitudes (e.g., \softline
regarding my own innocence in this case) do appear to be enough to constitute positive \softline
justification for the beliefs I hold.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab We can broaden the picture in an obvious way. Informed, rational and attentive skeptics, \softline
possessed of internally consistent and coherent attitudes, might remain unconvinced by any of \softline
our empirical claims. According to this version of the argument from disagreement, that \softline
resistance defeats any justification we might have for our empirical beliefs. Though we can{\u8217\'92}t \softline
absolutely discount that possibility, the conclusion is so drastic as to call into question the \softline
soundness of the argument that generated it. If we assume, as everyone reading this will, that we \softline
do have some positively justified empirical beliefs, then, so far as I can tell, it follows that 
question-begging grounds can confer positive justification. For anything one might cite as \softline
evidence on behalf of one{\u8217\'92}s empirical beliefs will surely be regarded as question-begging by the \softline
skeptic.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab A similar story can be told regarding all of our philosophical beliefs. The most brilliant \softline
philosophers, rational, open-minded, and well-informed, have failed to agree amongst \softline
themselves on just about every key philosophical issue. If pervasive and intractable disagreement \softline
signaled an absence of justification, this would mean that none of those philosophers (much less \softline
the rest of us) would be at all justified in holding the philosophical views that they (we) do. But \softline
this seems false; it{\u8217\'92}s certainly belied by anyone who actually undertakes sincerely to argue \softline
philosophically. One who has developed a theoretically sophisticated take on some philosophical \softline
issue, coming to grips with deep criticisms and developing novel and integrated positive \softline
proposals, is surely justified to some extent in thinking her views correct. Of course such a \softline
person will see that some others will fail to be convinced{\u8211\'96}even some others who are as smart, \softline
ingenious and imaginative as she is. She will recognize her fallibility and appreciate a salient \softline
feature of philosophical history{\u8211\'96}namely, the failure of greater minds to attract even near-unanimity on most of the major points that they had advanced. Still, awareness of this history, \softline
and the skepticism of some of her contemporaries, is not enough to force her to suspend \softline
judgment on the views that she has so skillfully defended.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab I see no reason to register a different verdict for ethics. Deep disagreement there, as \softline
elsewhere, should give one pause. It can sap one{\u8217\'92}s confidence, and if it does, then that (but not \softline
the disagreement }{\plain \fs24 \i per se}{\plain \fs24 ) may be sufficient to undercut one{\u8217\'92}s justification. But this is no different \softline
from the general case. Provided that one brings to a dispute a moral belief that is justified, then 
exposure to conflicting belief needn{\u8217\'92}t defeat one{\u8217\'92}s justification, even if one is unable to \softline
convince an intelligent other of the error of his ways. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The present argument against the epistemic justification of moral belief relies on the \softline
following principle (or something very like it):\par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 (E) If (i) S believes that p, and R believes that not-p, and (ii) S and R know of this disagreement, \softline
and (iii) S and R have formed their beliefs in rational and informed ways, then S is not justified \softline
in a belief that p, and R is not justified in a belief that not-p.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}\pard \fs24\sl480\slmult1 
{\plain \fs24 (E) may be true. But no one could be justified in believing it. (E) itself is the subject of \softline
intractable disagreement--there are informed and rational people who endorse it, and equally \softline
qualified agents who reject it. By its own lights, then, we must suspend judgment about (E). \softline
Having done that, however, we are no longer epistemically forbidden from positively embracing \softline
a contested belief, even if our opponents are as smart we as are.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab We can reveal another kind of skeptical self-defeat if we renew our emphasis on \softline
establishing a parity between ethical investigation and philosophical investigations generally. A \softline
familiar skeptical line is that there isn{\u8217\'92}t, really, any adequate evidence that can be called upon to \softline
support our ethical opinions. Unlike empirical investigations, we haven{\u8217\'92}t anything tangible that \softline
can, at the end of the day, finally settle a disputed moral question. All the sensory evidence at \softline
our disposal will underdetermine an ethical verdict. And what{\u8217\'92}s left? Only our emotional \softline
responses and our moral convictions, both of which are traceable to accidents of birth and \softline
upbringing. Their genesis marks them as unreliable indicators of any truth there might be. But \softline
there{\u8217\'92}s nothing else to rely on in ethics. And therefore our moral views lack justification, one \softline
and all.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The problem with such an argument should by now be apparent. There is a striking 
equivalence between the nature and source of our evidence in philosophy, and in ethics. We \softline
have no choice but to rely on our intuitions and considered judgments in both. What tells us, for \softline
example, that many proposed analyses of knowledge are no good is not some empirical finding \softline
that scientists have unearthed. It is instead our conceptual intuitions about counter-examples. If \softline
we want to know whether determinism is compatible with free will, we will consult arguments \softline
that invariably appeal to our intuitive responses to hypothetical cases. If such convictions and \softline
responses have no evidential credibility, then we should have to regard all philosophical beliefs \softline
as unjustified. Perhaps they are. But then those of the ethical naturalist, and the moral antirealist, \softline
are similarly undone. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b VI. The Causal Inefficacy of Moral Facts}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Gilbert Harman (1977: ch. 1) has famously charged that moral facts are causally inert, and are \softline
therefore best construed antirealistically. His brief remarks have inspired a minor cottage \softline
industry, most of whose workers, it seems to me, are headed in the wrong direction. Rather than \softline
try to establish that point with a survey of the literature, I will try for the larger picture, with the \softline
aim of arguing that Harman's basic line of attack is misdirected.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Harman doesn't put things in quite this way, but I think his position, and that of many \softline
who take his lead, can be accurately captured in the following argument:\par
}\pard \fs24
{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 1. If something exists, and its existence is best construed realistically, then it must possess \softline
independent causal powers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 2. Moral facts possess no independent causal powers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 3. Therefore either moral facts don't exist, or their existence isn't best construed realistically.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab \par
}\pard \fs24\sl480\slmult1 
{\plain \fs24 Harman himself believes in moral facts, though he regards them as artifacts of social 
agreements. He is an ethical relativist, not a realist.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Since the argument is valid, any realist must choose either or both of the premises to \softline
come in for criticism. I opt for (1), because I suspect that (2) is true. A property has independent \softline
causal powers only if its instantiation by itself has causal implications, apart from the \softline
instantiation of any other properties it may in an instance depend on or be realized by. I{\u8217\'92}m not \softline
confident that moral facts possess such powers. }{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab I won{\u8217\'92}t try to vindicate my lack of confidence here. If it is misplaced, then so much the \softline
better for moral realism. Moral properties would possess independent causal power, and thereby \softline
pass the most stringent test for ontological inclusion. But let{\u8217\'92}s instead imagine that my suspicion \softline
is correct, and that we are thus placed in what many have considered a worst-case scenario: \softline
trying to defend the existence of moral properties, realistically construed, while acknowledging \softline
that they are fundamentally different in kind from the properties whose existence is ratified by \softline
the natural sciences. If I am right, then such things as a benefactor's generosity, a regime's \softline
injustice, a friend's thoughtfulness, are causes (if they are) only by virtue of inheriting the causal \softline
powers of the properties that realize them at a time. Any causal power they have is exhausted by \softline
that of the subvening properties that fix a situation's moral character. Nothing follows from this \softline
admission unless we are also prepared to insist on a causal test of ontological credibility, of the \softline
sort espoused in Harman's first premise.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Such a test is powerfully motivated, but is ultimately resistible. This test is an application \softline
of Occam's razor, and is responsible for our having pared down our ontology in many sensible \softline
ways. We{\u8217\'92}re quite finished with explanations that invoke Osiris or golems or centaurs, and \softline
Occam{\u8217\'92}s razor is responsible for that. All that these entities were once invoked to explain can be 
more parsimoniously explained by relying on properties whose existence is vindicated through \softline
scientific confirmation. And such confirmation makes essential reference to a putative entity's \softline
causal powers.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab So out with the trolls, the ancient pantheon, and the vampires. That's not so bad, is it? \softline
Such things aren't required to explain the goings-on in our world. But then, by my admission, \softline
neither are moral facts. So, by parity of reasoning, either we keep moral facts, but at the expense \softline
of a bloated ontology that implausibly lets these minor supernatural agents sneak back in, or we \softline
abolish the lot of them. Why should morality get special treatment here, when, as we all agree, \softline
the causal test has done its good work in so many other areas? Very conveniently for me, I don't \softline
have the time in this context to provide the full answer to this question.{}{\plain \fs24 \super 6{\footnote \pard \fs24\sa240 
{\plain \fs24 \super 6}{}{\plain \fs24  }{\plain \fs24 I try my hand in }{\plain \fs24 \i Moral Realism}{\plain \fs24 , pp. 98-114.}}}
}{\plain \fs24  But in lieu of that long \softline
story, let me offer a brief reply, and then a longer one that invokes the ethics-philosophy parallel \softline
that I have already relied on.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The brief reply: application of the causal test has highly counter-intuitive implications. \softline
This is so on two assumptions: first, that only physical properties possess independent causal \softline
powers, and second, that at least most of the properties of the special sciences are not identical \softline
to, but only supervenient upon, those of physics. From these assumptions, allied with the causal \softline
test, it follows that nothing exists but (roughly) atoms and the void. There certainly won't be any \softline
such things as atmospheres, rock strata, newts and dandelions, if we grant that such things are \softline
not type-identical to anything referred to in a physics journal. It seems to me that such things do \softline
exist, and are multiply realizable by, rather than identical to, particular physical properties. Thus \softline
the causal test eliminates too much from our ontology.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab Suppose that doesn't faze you--you can live with such a parsimonious ontology, or you \softline
don't endorse one of the two assumptions that got us there.{}{\plain \fs24 \super 7{\footnote \pard \fs24\sa240 
{\plain \fs24 \super 7}{}{\plain \fs24  }{\plain \fs24 Beware: arguments for rejecting either assumption may well allow moral facts to pass \softline
the causal test (though any sound argument rejecting the second assumption would generate a \softline
naturalistic, rather than a nonnaturalistic, moral realism).}}}
}{\plain \fs24  Still, we can invoke the ethics-philosophy parallel in the service of a further argument that should worry proponents of the \softline
causal test. By way of introduction, we can note that moral facts are a species of }{\plain \fs24 \i normative fact}{\plain \fs24 . \softline
Normative facts are those that tell us what we }{\plain \fs24 \i ought }{\plain \fs24 to do; they rely on norms, or standards, for \softline
conduct within a given realm. Normative facts cause nothing of their own accord.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab We can be helped to see this by comparing ethics, not to philosophy as a whole, but to \softline
one of its close philosophical cousins. In my opinion, moral facts are }{\plain \fs24 \i sui generis}{\plain \fs24 , but they are \softline
most similar to another kind of normative fact{\u8211\'96}epistemic facts. Epistemic facts concern what we \softline
ought to believe, provided that our beliefs are aimed at the truth. Once one understands the \softline
concept of logical validity, then if confronted with a modus ponens argument, one }{\plain \fs24 \i ought to \softline
}{\plain \fs24 believe that it is logically valid. This is a true epistemic principle.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab It{\u8217\'92}s also the case that you oughtn{\u8217\'92}t believe things that you have no evidence for, and \softline
much evidence against. What does this epistemic truth cause? Nothing. Nor are particular, \softline
concrete epistemic duties{\u8211\'96}duties had by agents at a time{\u8211\'96}at all independently causally \softline
efficacious. Epistemic facts have as their primary function the specification of standards that \softline
should or must be met. We can say, if we like, that such standards are descriptive{\u8211\'96}they describe \softline
the conditions under which agents are (e.g.) appropriately sensitive to evidence, justified in their \softline
beliefs, warranted in their views. But, unlike natural scientific principles and facts, such \softline
normative standards may be perfectly correct even if they are honored only in the breach. The 
epistemic requirement that we proportion our beliefs to the evidence can be true even in a world \softline
populated wholly by spell-casters and astrologers. The normative facts that specify the \softline
conditions under which we ought to believe the truth, or behave morally, lack the ability to \softline
explain the workings of the natural order. Our epistemic and moral duties cannot explain why \softline
apples fall from trees, why smallpox takes its victims, why leopards have their spots. But they \softline
may exist for all that.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Nor is this failure something specific to the moral or epistemological realms. Consider \softline
prudential or instrumental duties{\u8211\'96}those that require us to enhance self-interest or efficiently \softline
satisfy our desires. Such normative demands do not explain what goes on in the world. \softline
Alternatively, if they are thought, for instance, to be powerful enough to explain why agents act \softline
as they do, then surely moral and epistemic requirements are capable of doing so as well. I see \softline
no basis for distinguishing the causal powers of any of these normative types from one another.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab I don't mean to suggest for a moment that the causal test is useless. Rather, I think we \softline
should recognize its limits. The causal test fails as a general ontological test: it doesn't work \softline
when applied to the normative realm.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Scientific principles are vindicated, when they are, because they are able to do two \softline
closely related things: cite the causes of past events, and accurately predict the nature and \softline
occurrence of future events. Their claim to be genuinely explanatory depends almost entirely on \softline
their ability to discharge these two tasks. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab But moral rules are not like that. We }{\plain \fs24 \i can}{\plain \fs24  construe rules in this way: Brink, Sturgeon and \softline
others manage this feat.{}{\plain \fs24 \super 8{\footnote \pard \fs24\sa240 
{\plain \fs24 \super 8}{}{\plain \fs24  See, e.g., Brink 1989: 182-197, Sturgeon 1986, Boyd 1988, Railton1986.}}}
}{\plain \fs24  But it{\u8217\'92}s not a very natural way to regard them. Moral principles aren{\u8217\'92}t 
viewed in the first instance as hypotheses that predict the actions of agents, but rather as \softline
requirements that everyone knows will encounter predictive failures. True, moral principles will \softline
reliably predict the doings of good and bad agents. }{\plain \fs24 But that presupposes the reality of moral \softline
properties (goodness and badness), and there{\u8217\'92}s no reason to make such a concession at this stage, \softline
especially given the seriousness of antirealist charges, and the proper aim (given a naturalistic \softline
vantage point) of beginning from a neutral perspective and relying on the causal test as a way to \softline
determine the nature of reality.{}{\plain \fs24 \super 9{\footnote \pard \fs24\sa240 
{\plain \fs24 \super 9}{}{\plain \fs24  }{\plain \fs24 So in this respect I think that Harman was wrong to concede to his opponents the \softline
existence of moral facts. The proper starting point for an antirealist is one in which we suspend \softline
judgment on the existence of such facts, and demand of the realist some positive arguments for \softline
believing in them. Harman instead was willing to grant the existence of moral facts, but claimed \softline
that even so they possessed no independent causal powers, and so could not be construed \softline
realistically.}}}
}{\plain \fs24  Yes, we can enshrine moral predicates within true \softline
counterfactuals, even (in some cases) counterfactuals of greater generality than those describable \softline
at the physical level. But that is no proof of moral realism, as we can do the same for the \softline
predicates of etiquette and the civil law, which obviously cannot be construed realistically. \softline
Moral principles and facts aren't meant to explain behavior, or anticipate our actions, but rather \softline
to }{\plain \fs24 \i prescribe }{\plain \fs24 how we ought to behave, or }{\plain \fs24 \i evaluate}{\plain \fs24  states or events. They don't cite the causes of \softline
outcomes, but rather indicate what sort of conduct would merit approval, or justify our gratitude, \softline
or legitimate some result. Science can't tell us such things.\ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \ul0 \tab \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab If I am right, then an allegiance to the causal test entirely eliminates the normative realm. \softline
But this is highly implausible. There }{\plain \fs24 \i are}{\plain \fs24  reasons to believe things, reasons to satisfy one{\u8217\'92}s \softline
desires, reasons to look out for oneself. There are also moral duties to aid others and refrain \softline
from harming them, even if doing so isn{\u8217\'92}t going to improve one{\u8217\'92}s lot in life. The standards that 
supply such reasons are not capable of causing anything. Nor, it seems, are the reasons or \softline
obligations themselves. (Again, if they are, all the better for moral realists.){}{\plain \fs24 \super 10{\footnote \pard \fs24\sa240 
{\plain \fs24 \super 10}{}{\plain \fs24  One natural line of thinking seems mistaken. That is the one that attributes causal \softline
power to normative facts by noting that they, }{\plain \fs24 as mediated by an agent{\u8217\'92}s beliefs and desires, can \softline
explain a great deal of why agents act as they do. That something is }{\plain \fs24 \i seen by an agent as \softline
}{\plain \fs24 (prudentially, epistemically or morally) obligatory is often enough to get one going. But that sort \softline
of mediation undermines the independence of the causal potency that the test requires.}{\plain \fs24  (This is \softline
one of Crispin Wright{\u8217\'92}s points (1992: 196).)}}}
}{\plain \fs24  If there is any such \softline
thing as a genuine reason, the test must fail. Alternatively, if the test is retained, then such \softline
reasons must be capable of passing it. And then the causal argument against moral facts \softline
evaporates.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Maybe we can have our cake and it eat, too? Why not retain the causal test, allow that \softline
normative facts exist, but view them, as Harman does moral facts, as by-products of human \softline
choice and election? The causal test is a realist's test. Failure to pass it doesn't mean that a \softline
putative fact doesn't exist. It just means that the fact cannot be construed realistically. Normative \softline
facts may be like this. If so, we could retain the test, and also retain a global normative \softline
antirealism. Perfectly in keeping with the physicalist leanings of so many of our contemporaries.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The animating spirit behind the causal test is the ontological principle that the real is \softline
limited to what is scientifically confirmable, and the epistemic principle that we have good \softline
reason to believe in something only if it impinges on our experience, or is required in the best \softline
explanation of that which does. The causal test obviously supports, and derives support from, \softline
both the ontological and the epistemic principle. Yet both principles are dubious. The case for \softline
the causal test is considerably diminished once we see why. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab The epistemic principle is problematic because it invokes an entity--a good reason--whose existence is not itself scientifically confirmable. It's like saying that God sustains a \softline
universe that contains no supernatural beings. There's a kind of internal incoherence here: the \softline
claim discounts the existence of the kind of thing that is presupposed by the claim itself. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Further, a belief{\u8217\'92}s being justified is not the sort of thing that impinges on our experience. \softline
Nor, seemingly, is reference to its epistemic status }{\plain \fs24 required to explain anything that we have \softline
ever observed. But then, by the epistemic principle under scrutiny, we have no good reason to \softline
think that there is any such thing as the property of being epistemically justified. But if there is \softline
no such property, then the principle that implies such a thing cannot itself be justified. And so \softline
we can be rid of it.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Here{\u8217\'92}s another way to get to the same result. We needn't make essential reference to this \softline
epistemic principle to explain why we see or hear or feel the things we do. Nor, so far as I can \softline
see, is any epistemic principle required in the best account of why various observable events \softline
have occurred in the world. So if the principle is true, then we lack a good reason for thinking it \softline
so. This principle, like normative standards quite generally, seeks to regulate and appraise \softline
conduct, rather than to describe its causal antecedents or powers. If that's sufficient to render it \softline
unreal, or sufficient to remove any justification we might have for believing it, then it can't \softline
rightly be used to constrain our epistemic findings or practices.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab And the ontological view? The relevant ontological principle tells us that the only \softline
existential truths there are (i.e., truths about what exists) are those that are scientifically \softline
confirmed. This is certainly false if we are concerned with science as it stands, as some \softline
existential truths have yet to be discovered. Yet the view is no more plausible if we are \softline
envisioning the edicts of a perfected natural science. \par
}{\plain \fs24 \ul0 \tab Here's why. Consider this existential claim:\par
}{\plain \fs24    (O) There are no existential truths other than those ratified by perfected natural sciences.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Either (O) is true or false. If false, let's drop it: our ontology wouldn't then be entirely fixed by \softline
the natural sciences. But if it's true, then it must be false: it's self-referentially incoherent. For \softline
(O) cannot itself be scientifically confirmed. If it were true, it would be an instance of a non-scientifically confirmable existential truth. Thus either way we go, (O) must be false.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab (O) is a thesis from metaphysics, not physics. Philosophers, not natural scientists, are the \softline
ones who will end up pronouncing on its merits. This is another application of the general idea \softline
that there are specifically philosophical truths that escape the ambit of scientific confirmation. \softline
There might be abstract entities, or such a thing as conceptual necessity, justified belief, or \softline
goodness. Bring your beakers, your electron microscopes, your calculators and calipers--you'll \softline
never find them. You can't abolish such things just because they lack independent causal power, \softline
and so escape empirical detection. After all, the principle calling for such abolition isn't itself \softline
scientifically confirmable.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab In the end, the absence of independent causal power is not a good reason to deny the \softline
existence of moral facts, realistically construed. Of course, nothing I've said in this section \softline
supplies any argument for thinking that there are such things. I doubt that causal considerations \softline
could do that. But undermining their role in antirealist arguments can go some ways towards \softline
removing a familiar barrier to justified belief in the sort of nonnaturalism that I find appealing.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \b VII. Conclusion}{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Once we attend to the fact that ethics is a branch of philosophy, the plausibility of 
nonnaturalistic moral realism is greatly enhanced. Philosophy is not a natural science. Basic, \softline
fundamental philosophical principles are realistic in nature. And central ethical principles are \softline
philosophical ones. This combination of claims gives us excellent reason to suppose that \softline
fundamental ethical truths are best construed realistically, and nonnaturalistically.  \ul0 \tab \par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab This seems to me to be a very powerful argument that can aid the nonnaturalist realist in \softline
replying to a number of perennial criticisms. One such criticism{\u8211\'96}that persistent, intractable \softline
moral disagreement is best explained as antirealists would do{\u8211\'96}can be met once we avail \softline
ourselves of the ethics-philosophy parallel. Moral disagreement shares all structural features \softline
with philosophical disagreement generally, and yet a global philosophical antirealism is very \softline
implausible. Moral disagreement also fails to provide a strong epistemic defeater for one's own \softline
already-justified moral beliefs. Controversial philosophical beliefs might be justifiedly held; \softline
things are no different in the specifically moral domain. And the causal inefficacy of moral facts \softline
can be admitted without threatening moral realism, since the causal test is too restrictive a \softline
standard for ontological credibility. Alternatively, if (contrary to my suspicions) moral facts do \softline
manage to pass that test, then retaining the test will entitle moral facts to admission into our \softline
ontology.\par
}{\plain \fs24 \tab Once we attend to the fact that ethics is a branch of philosophy, a defense of \softline
nonnaturalistic moral realism becomes a bit easier than it otherwise might be. Which is not to \softline
say that it{\u8217\'92}s at all easy{\u8211\'96}the many promissory notes scattered throughout this essay will attest to \softline
that. Still, reliance on the ethics-philosophy parallel enables us to plausibly respond to }{\plain \fs24 \i some }{\plain \fs24 of \softline
the critical obstacles to the development of a plausible ethical nonnaturalism. We can hardly \softline
hope to vindicate a complex metaethical theory in one fell swoop. We can, if the preceding 
arguments are any good, manage to dust off a neglected view and show that some of the sources \softline
of its unpopularity have been overrated. I hope to have done that here.{}{\plain \fs24 \super 11{\footnote \pard \fs24\sa240 
{\plain \fs24 \super 11}{}{\plain \fs24  My thanks to Paul Bloomfield, whose sense and gentle suasion I too frequently ignored \softline
in preparing the final version of this paper. Thanks also to Terence Cuneo, who gave me a \softline
number of incisive criticisms and suggestions for improvement.}}}
}{\plain \fs24 }{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 }\page 
\pard \fs24\qc\sl480\slmult1 
{\plain \fs24 \b REFERENCES}{\plain \fs24 \par
}\pard \fs24\sl480\slmult1 
{\plain \fs24 \par
}{\plain \fs24 Audi, Robert. 1997. }{\plain \fs24 \i Moral Knowledge and Ethical Character}{\plain \fs24 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Audi, Robert. 1999. {\u8220\'93}Self-Evidence,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i Philosophical Perspectives}{\plain \fs24  13: 205-226.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Audi, Robert. 2004. }{\plain \fs24 \i Kantian Intuitionism}{\plain \fs24 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Ayer, A.J. 1936. }{\plain \fs24 \i Language, Truth and Logic}{\plain \fs24 . London: Gollancz.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Blackburn, Simon. 1993. }{\plain \fs24 \i Essays in Quasi-Realism}{\plain \fs24 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Blackburn, Simon. 1998. }{\plain \fs24 \i Ruling Passions}{\plain \fs24 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Boyd, Richard. 1988. {\u8220\'93}How to Be a Moral Realist,{\u8221\'94} in Sayre-McCord 1988.\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-720\li720\sl480\slmult1 
{\plain \fs24 Brink, David. 1989. }{\plain \fs24 \i Moral Realism and the Foundations of Ethics}{\plain \fs24 . Cambridge: Cambridge \softline
University Press.\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-720\li720\sl480\slmult1 
{\plain \fs24 Copp, David and David Zimmerman, eds. 1984. }{\plain \fs24 \i Morality, Reason and Truth}{\plain \fs24 . Totowa, N.J.: \softline
Rowman and Littlefield.\par
}\pard \fs24\sl480\slmult1 
{\plain \fs24 Garner, Richard. 1994. }{\plain \fs24 \i Beyond Morality}{\plain \fs24 . Philadelphia: Temple University Press.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Gibbard, Allan. 1990. }{\plain \fs24 \i Wise Choices, Apt Feelings}{\plain \fs24 . Cambridge, Mass. Harvard University Press.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Hare, Richard. 1952. }{\plain \fs24 \i The Language of Morals}{\plain \fs24 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Hare, Richard. 1963. }{\plain \fs24 \i Freedom and Reason}{\plain \fs24 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Harman, Gilbert. 1977. }{\plain \fs24 \i The Nature of Morality}{\plain \fs24 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Jackson, Frank. 1998. }{\plain \fs24 \i From Metaphysics to Ethics}{\plain \fs24 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Joyce, Richard. 2001. }{\plain \fs24 \i The Myth of Morality}{\plain \fs24 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Mackie, John. 1977. }{\plain \fs24 \i Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong}{\plain \fs24 . New York: Penguin.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Railton, Peter. 1986. {\u8220\'93}Moral Realism,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i Philosophical Review}{\plain \fs24  95: 163-207.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Sayre-McCord, Geoffrey, ed. 1988. }{\plain \fs24 \i Moral Realism}{\plain \fs24 . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.\par
}\fs24\pard \fs24\sl480\slmult1 
{\plain \fs24 Skorupksi, John. 1999. {\u8220\'93}Irrealist Cognitivism,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i Ratio}{\field{\*\fldinst   { HYPERLINK "doLS.ws?ss=Ratio-+in+SO" }}{\fldrslt{{\*\cs57\i\ul\cf6 doLS.ws?ss=Ratio-+in+SO}}}}{\plain \fs24 \i }{\plain \fs24  12(4): 436-459}{\plain \fs24 .\par
}{\plain \fs24 Stevenson, Charles L. 1937. {\u8220\'93}The Emotive Meaning of Ethical Terms,{\u8221\'94} in Stevenson 1963.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Stevenson, Charles L. 1948. {\u8220\'93}The Nature of Ethical Disagreement,{\u8221\'94} in Stevenson 1963.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Stevenson, Charles L. 1963. }{\plain \fs24 \i Facts and Values}{\plain \fs24 . New Haven: Yale University Press.\par
}\pard \fs24\fi-720\li720\sl480\slmult1 
{\plain \fs24 Stratton-Lake, Philip. 2002. }{\plain \fs24 \i Ethical Intuitionism: Re-evaluations. }{\plain \fs24 Oxford: Oxford University \softline
Press.\par
}\pard \fs24\sl480\slmult1 
{\plain \fs24 Sturgeon, Nicholas. 1984. {\u8220\'93}Moral Explanations,{\u8221\'94} in Copp and Zimmerman 1984.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Sturgeon, Nicholas. 2003. {\u8220\'93}Moore on Ethical Naturalism,{\u8221\'94} }{\plain \fs24 \i Ethics}{\plain \fs24  113: 528-556.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Timmons, Mark. 1999. }{\plain \fs24 \i Morality without Foundations}{\plain \fs24 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.\par
}{\plain \fs24 Wright, Crispin. 1992. }{\plain \fs24 \i Truth and Objectivity}{\plain \fs24 . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.\pard \fs24\sl480\slmult1 
}}