{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 In this chapter, I advance my view. My metaethical theory is a positive version of virtue ethics that provides strong explanatory power over a range of phenomena of human thought, action, and speech. In short, it explains the explananda laid out in the previous chapter. \
\
Virtue ethics (whether naturalistic or no) offers a satisfying story that explains each of these explananda individually and (even more satisfyingly) as a set. Despite the problems of virtue theory and objections thereto, none of the theoretical costs seems as high as jettisoning a ready-made explanation of one of these # criteria. The challenge is posed to others to offer better explanations individually or as a whole. \
\
Recall the four criteria: practical reason, objective purport of evaluative discourse, seemingly incorrigible normative foundation knowledge, the unity and diversity of goods, the unity and diversity of human goodness, group and individual human goodness, and superlative human goodness. \
\
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://78BC5724-C7ED-446C-A724-14383EAADF7F"}}{\fldrslt Virtue ethics explains all these in a satisfying account of nature and human nature. \
}}\
After hearing my account, readers will likely have one of three reactions.\
Ssome readers will be tempted to argue some of the explananda that aren\'92t explained by the objector\'92s preferred theory need explaining away. My reply will be to revisit arguments from Chapter 1. I point out that each explanandum is a common, obvious, public phenomenon that calls for explanation \'97 and the explaining away had better be more plausible than the explanation. But the best way to \'91explain away\'92 these phenomena is to affirm that our normative talk is massively mistaken in some way. For such nihilists, a safe course of action is to put the book down and read something else. \
\
The second is likely to be that my virtue theory is just fine but another theory could explain the facts too. \
My reply will consume chapter 3. In short, other theories 
\i could
\i0  account for them; virtue theory just accounts for them more and more satisfyingly. \
\
The third objection is that the theory laid out is not sufficiently naturalistic. This is the objection that I will concede has apparent force. I will make it even more clearly and strongly in chapter 4, clarify its terms in chapter 5, and answer it in chapter 6.  }