{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\fs22 \cf0 He is addressing the objection of the sophists that nomos is contrary to physis. In 
\i Politics 
\i0 I.2
\i , 
\i0 he says that the nature is most fully expressed in a fully actualized political form. And of language and moral discourse indicating our political nature, diffusing the sophistic notion. The rest of Book I is asking which activities are natural? Some are more than others. Some forms of slavery, some forms of commerce (not usury), are natural. \
\
Human nature is to make nomos. We make nomoi, laws, customs, conventions, the same way spiders make wombs. Man is by nature a political animal. Our nature is fully realized only within the polis. A human being outside of polis is no longer a human being. They have lost their telos and lost their identity. Only in the polis do you see what human nature really is. Our capacity for constructive moral activity, and for moral reasoning and discourse \'97 the characteristic of moral discourse in language and community. \
\
The thing about his teleology is that he gives you pieces in various works, never all at once in one work. That\'92s consistent with the 
\i physics, 
\i0 the final cause of any natural substance is equivalent to its formal cause. What that growing thing within nature is seeking to realize is the full realization of its own form. Politics is just a special form of that. But the trick is he also uses rainfall to say that rainfall exists for the sake of human agriculture or farming. Nature can also be viewed anthropocentrically. So how does that consist with 
\i PHysics II 
\i0 where every natural organism is realizing its form for the sake of its form. From a higher perspective, 
\i Metaphysics Lambda 10, 
\i0 he asks in what sense does the cosmos contain the good? Is it the way an army contains the good just be being structured well, or is the way the general embodies the good of the army by being the one who directs and mobilizes it? It\'92s both. God the prime mover is the good in both of those senses. The prime mover is self thinking thought that thinks all intelligible reality at once in full actuality \'97 it is true in a sense that natural processes take place for our sake. Because we are nous present within nature. Physics I the \'93ergon\'94 argument, we have logos, we have reason, that\'92s our defining feature, and that gives us our own ergon. In the theological context of M. L our nous means that we are in a partial limited way to the cosmos as God is to the cosmos. Capable of realizing those natural forms as intelligible objects and bringing them to an intelligible level of actuality. Doing that we partake of the activity that it means to be god. \
\
We gesture to that in the end of 
\i Ethics, 
\i0 human life is as the capstone element of this much larger cosmic structure. \
\
Even Marx picks up the notion that man is a political animal by nature \'97 some forms of capitalism are unnatural. }