{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red20\green20\blue20;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 \
2. Going Back to the Drawing Board about Morality, Rationality, and Normativity\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Morality\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Ethics or moral philosophy has been much maligned. Even since Hume called ethics \'93easy and obvious\'94, critics have either characterized ethics as much too easy to be or much too hard to be worth bothering over. Metaethics, in analytic philosophy, for the last 100 years has breathed some life into what Darwall calls \'93philosophical ethics\'94 \'97 including normative ethical and meta-ethical considerations as aspects of one philosophical theory. Bioethics, in applied philosophy, for the last 40 years or so, has breathed some life into ethics as well. But confusion about the foundations of ethics persists. Confusion about the significance of moral disagreement is one example: does just the fact that Bob thinks A and Bettie thinks not-A render all of ethical science bankrupt? But there are others. Alasdair MacIntyre famously compared moral philosophy today to a hypothetical post-apocolyptic natural philosophy, where all the scientists have died and all the science textbooks preserved only in fragments. People have snatches here and there of knowledge, but have lost the overall 
\i point.
\f1\i0\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\i\fs28  
\i0 Nancy Murphy\'92s essay helped me here, in 
\i How Successful is Naturalism? 
\f1\i0\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  
\i  
\i0\b \
\
Rationality\

\b0 Rationality is the purview of judgments. Propositional judgments like  \
1a. \'93It rained today\'94, \
2a. \'93Kathy is smart\'94, \
3a. \'93Basing your beliefs on available evidence is epistemically responsible\'94 are all judgments made by the faculty of reason. Such judgments may be 
\i thought 
\i0 or 
\i uttered. 
\i0 Regardless, they are (or perhaps express) propositions. \
As such, they are in principle subject to logical relations between other propositions. For example, other propositions like \
1b. \'93if it rained today, the grass will need mowing,\'94 and \
2b. \'93Every paper of Kathy\'92s I\'92ve read has been quite insightful\'94 and \
3b. \'93Bob ignores available evidence\'94 \
bear important relations between 1-3. When those relations are made explicit, we can begin to judge the value of inferences from 1a to 1b and so on. (For instance, I can infer from 1 and 1b that (1c) \'93the grass will need mowing.\'94) \
\
Rationality as it is traditionally understood has two moods: theoretical and practical. Theoretical rational judgments aspire to describe reality as it is. So, most basically, \'93The cat is (currently) on the mat\'94 aspires to denote the location of the cat at the time and in the context of utterance. It is true just in case that the cat\'92s being on the mat obtains. But description of reality come in a wide variety of types. Since there are many types or modes of reality, there are many types or modes of our judgments about realities. Some still mundane examples: \'93The cat was on the mat\'94 aspires to describe the way things were at some point in the past; \'93the cat will be on the mat when he gets back\'94 aspires to describe reality as it will be in the future. \
As it is sometimes expressed, the \'93direction of fit\'94 of theoretical rational judgments is world to mind. We want, when we are making judgments (using our rational faculties) to get the world right. (I am here bypassing whole conversations about the correspondence theory of truth by assuming the correspondence theory is, well, true). \
Now, theoretical rational judgments can also pick out non-temporally indexed entities and properties like mathematical objects (on a platonistic view of numbers),  or modal properties, or logical relations. \
For example, judging it to be true that \'93Spelunking in Mammoth Cave is impossible\'94 is affirming the truth of the proposition; the proposition aspires to denote real modal properties, depending of course on one\'92s metaphysical commitments about modality. (I am hear trying to avoid such hare\'92s nests and assuming that our common way of speaking is not massively mistaken.)\
For another example, take the judgment that \'93squares have four sides.\'94 I don\'92t take the judgment that squares have four sides to be 
\i merely 
\i0 conceptual \'97 a judgment about the word square or the concept of squares. I take it to be also a kind of synthesis or discovery. We have to look at and think about a square or two before we realize \'97 perhaps in a flash \'97 that 
\i all 
\i0 squares are necessarily four-sided things. Or, if you prefer \'93the concept of a square is the concept of a necessarily four-sided thing.\'94 \
Theoretical rational judgments also undertake other tasks \'97 to explain, and to hypothesize or predict.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 R. Jay Wallace, \'93Practical Reason\'94, 
\i Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
\i0 .
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  We might ask: why is there cat hair on the mat? Perhaps (surprise) \'93because the cat was on the mat.\'94 This explanation aspires to describe not only a state of affairs about the location of the cat in the past, but also posits a causal relation between that state of affairs and the (present) facts. Or we might ask: Will the cat ever come sit on the mat? \'93Yes, he has slept there every night for the past two weeks; the cat will sit on the mat.\'94 This hypothesis doesn\'92t just aspire to describe the future state of affairs but aspires to describe an inferential relation between the cat\'92s past behavior and future behavior. \
A few other varieties of theoretical rational judgments. According to cognitivist moral philosophers, judgments with evaluative predicates similarly aspire to describe the moral facts: \'93Bob lacks integrity.\'94  We might say the same of judgments with predicates of aesthetic value: \'93The horse farms are beautiful this time of year.\'94 \
All of these propositions aspire to describe reality as it is. They aspire to pick out facts of various kinds: present empirical facts (the cat is on the mat), past or future empirical facts, modal facts, and moral or aesthetic facts. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Practical Reason
\b0 \
Practical rational judgments aspire not to describe reality but to describe what ought to be. So, most basically, \'93We need to run to the store for more milk\'94 expresses a proposition but not one that aspires to describe the facts as they are \'97 \'93We are out of milk\'94 would do that better. Rather, the proposition picks out what Allan Gibbered calls \'93the thing to do.\'94 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
As Gibbered says, I have appropriated a couple of turns of phrase in English to express planning judgments: if 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
is \'93the thing to do,\'94 as I\'92m using the expression, that rules out doing anything else; if 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
is \'93okay to do,\'94 that rules out ruling 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
out.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Gibbard, 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Thinking How to Live 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
137.
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 Practical rationality is defined in distinction to theoretical reflection which \'93is concerned with matters of fact and their explanation [in that it] takes a distinctively normative question as its starting point.\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 R. Jay Wallace.
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Reason (and practical reason) are human faculties we have (or, if you prefer, \'93processes\'94)
\b0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
We humans have the ability to give reasons for what ought to be done or left undone, what ought to be said or left unsaid, what ought to be made or unmade. All functional human adults have this ability \'97 barring developmental disability or mental illness. We make plans and try to act them out. We write scripts for what we want to say (either on stage or to a loved one); we write out stage direction for what we want to do and when; we write out laws defining what how we want everyone in our society, on pain of civil consequences, to behave and talk. We make resolutions for virtues to acquire in the coming year, or weight to be lost, or vices to be kicked. \
However this ability came about, we seem to have it. I am using the term \'91faculty\'92 to denote the ability to, more or less at will, initiate this process of rational cognition or rational deliberation. I am not trying to assume too much about human psychology or philosophical anthropology by using the noun  \'93Rationality\'94  with its connotations of a capital \'93R\'94. If you prefer, call it \'93rationalities\'94 with a lower-case \'93r\'94 and consider it a cluster of cognitive processes. Whether you think those processes are implanted in human beings by God or Nature as a spark of the divine Logos, or think those processes are naturally selected via genetic drift over countless generations of failed early models, you probably agree that those processes exist (or that faculty exists) in us, and that they are operative right now as you listen and as I speak. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Can Practical 
\i Reason 
\i0 even exist?
\b0 \
Now the question is whether rationality can be practical \'97 whether practicality can be rational. If we assume, as Hume appears to have, that facts and values are different and that reason aspires to judge facts while values are a world apart, then there is just no such thing as 
\i practical reason. 
\i0 If values are things desired, aspired to, hoped for, wished for, instinctually pursued, and so on, and nothing more \'97 then there is no such thing as practical reason. \
\
But if reason has these two moods, then some of the rational judgments we make are practical as well \'97 for instance, I might judge that \'93I ought to save for retirement\'94 and then proceed to fill out a form authorizing my university to reserve a portion of my paycheck for retirement. I would be acting on the judgment. I would be treating the judgment as a maxim or rule of conduct. I would be judging it to be 
\i true 
\i0 in some sense that I 
\i really 
\i0 ought to save for retirement \'97 that is really 
\i the thing to do. 
\i0 On this view, \'93the proper focus of practical reflection is the question of what it would be to act well (Lawrence 1995, Foot 2001)\'94.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 R. Jay Wallace, \'93Practical Reason\'94 
\i Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
\i0 .
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  Viewing practical reflection as necessarily value-laden, as the kind of thing that by definition seeks the good, is of course not Humean. But so much the worse for Hume. \
\
\
\

\b The Normative Web gets it right\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li720\pardirnatural

\f2\b0\fs20 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93Other philosophers remain unimpressed with this naturalistic approach to practical reason. One ground for dissatisfaction with it is the following. The expressivist strategy relies on an initial contrast between practical reflection on the one hand, and the genuine forms of cognitive activity characteristic of theoretical reasoning on the other. There has to be some important sense in which practical discourse does not satisfy the standards of rationality that distinguish authentic cognitive discourse in the literal sense; otherwise the contention that normative discourse is expressive rather than cognitive will lack any significant content. But the contrast between theoretical and practical reflection required for this purpose seems elusive. As we saw in section 1 above, theoretical reasoning appears to be no less a normative enterprise than practical reasoning.  It is plausibly understood to concern itself with reasons for belief, the evidence and other considerations that speak for and against particular conclusions about the way things are in the world. To the extent this is the case, theoretical and practical reasoning would both seem equally problematic from the naturalistic perspective\'97assuming, that is, that it leaves no place for such normative considerations as reasons. But if naturalism calls into question the credentials of theoretical reason, it thereby undermines the contrast between genuine reasoning and noncognitive forms of normative and evaluative discourse on which expressivists themselves rely.\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f2\fs20 R. Jay Wallace
\f1\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\b\fs20 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\fs28 \cf0 \
John McDowell gets it right\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 For John McDowell, the \'93space of reasons\'94 includes both theoretical and practical reasons. That is, human beings are \'93sensitive to reasons\'94 which entails 
\i both 
\i0 that we can speculate about we ought to believe (about what is true, which is the same) and about what we ought to do or say (about what is good, which is the same). \
\
}