# Hursthouse, Review of *Intelligent Virtue* #

Julia Annas 
INTELLIGENT VIRTUE 
200pp. Oxford University Press. £45 (US $85). 
978 0 19 922878 2


T he rather quaint word “virtue” names a concept which is actually very familiar: the concept of a morally good character trait, the sort of thing we are talking about when we say of people that they are kind rather than unkind, honest rather than dishonest, unselfish rather than selfish. Julia Annas’s short book, Intelligent Virtue, aims to give an account of this familiar concept and, although it is partly addressed to modern moral philosophers, it is intended for a wider audience and written with such lucid simplicity that any reader of the TLS who has been sufficiently interested to read this far should find it enjoyable, instructive and inspiring.

That said, such readers may be surprised to discover that they are also learning quite a bit about ancient Greek ethical philosophy. Annas, as one of the world’s leading scholars in the area, writes with authority about the Greeks, but her overall aim is to elucidate the concept of virtue. What she reveals is the way in which two ideas the Greeks explicitly had about virtue are still implicit in our thought.

The first is “the skill analogy” which figures in Plato’s early Socratic dialogues. The idea is that virtues are, in many ways, analogous to practical skills such as playing the piano, or tennis or golf, or being a competent plumber or electrician or cook. This might not be the first thought that occurs to us when thinking about virtue. Annas’s point is that we need to learn practical skills, and the same goes for virtue. As parents know only too well, we are not born good, though quite possibly, as with some skills, some of us are born with a greater aptitude for learning to be kind or brave than others. Moreover, practical skills have to be learnt by practice – we acquire the skill of playing the piano by playing it, we become builders by building. Again, the same goes for virtue; we become generous by doing generous things, and brave by doing brave ones. Unfortunately, it also goes for vice. We become cruel and selfish by doing cruel and selfish things and, as Annas points out, our characters start being formed by those who bring us up from very early on, for good or ill. So this simple analogy with practical skills (that we need to learn virtue by doing virtuous actions) immediately highlights the importance of moral education from that early stage.

Annas’s point is that we need to learn practical skills, and the same goes for virtue
Annas identifies other features that learning virtue shares with the learning of many skills, summing them up as “the drive to aspire”. These features indicate the significance of the word “intelligent” in her title. Acquiring a skill of any complexity is not just a matter of copying whatever the expert teaching you does; you have to understand the reasons why they are doing this here and now. If I am to acquire such a skill, I need to grasp such reasons and then use them to direct myself in independent action. Moreover, if I am to be anything but mediocre, I must strive to improve, to learn new reasons from my blunders. So the “drive to aspire” involves aspiring to understanding, to independence or “self-direction”, and to self-improvement.

These are all important features of learning virtue. Although young children undoubtedly learn a lot about virtue just by copying good role models, they pick up some understanding of the reasons for which the honest or generous actions are done, act themselves for those reasons – and learn new reasons by being corrected (“Yes, I know it’s the truth, but it’s not polite to say so”, “Yes, it was nice of you to think of giving it to her, but it’s not yours to give”). As they get older, they can recognize their own mistakes, and, aspiring to improve, they acquire a better understanding of the virtues and what they require.

As Annas notes, teachers of many skills are disappointed when their pupils, rather than striving to improve, lapse into simple repetition and routine, thinking that what they are now able to do is “good enough”. That does not matter for some skills, but it is no way to become a concert pianist, or an expert and creative boat-builder or chef, and no way to acquire virtue. Virtue is most analogous to those skills that need to be sustained by the continuous exercise of them directed by the drive to aspire – to do better through a better understanding of the activity one is engaged in.

Of course, there is such a thing as being “ethically lazy”, as Annas puts it; that is, thinking that how one goes on must be good enough, perhaps because it is the way that respectable people in one’s society go on. But Annas is surely right that our concept of a virtuous person is of something more intelligently thoughtful than this. Just as the people who become experts in the complex skills seek to understand what they are doing so well that they can adapt intelligently to new circumstances or experiences and think of new ways to approach problems, so it is with someone who is really virtuous; they find their own reasons for doing what ought to be done.

It is sometimes said that thinking in terms of the virtues is bound to be parochial, conservative and culturally relative. Annas responds to this criticism by emphasizing the fact that acquiring virtue involves the drive to aspire. At first sight, the criticism may seem to be inescapable, for do we not, inevitably, begin to acquire the virtues within the confines of, as Annas says, “a particular family, city, religion and country”? Certainly that is how we begin, just as we begin to acquire many practical skills under the auspices of a particular teacher who often belongs to a particular school or tradition. But, having been taught to think in terms of the reasons the virtues give us for acting in certain ways, and having directed ourselves towards independent action, we can recognize reasons for acting in ways that conflict with what counts as acceptable in our original context. We can become intelligently critical of our own milieu.

Having “expertise” in virtue is being able to act really well, mindful of the limits that one virtue sets on another
The role of intelligence or reason in virtue is further developed in Annas’s discussion of the ancient Greek claim about “the unity of the virtues” – the idea that the virtues are not independent but imply each other and are unified by practical intelligence. On the face of it, the skill analogy seems to support the contrary view: surely one can be honest and kind and still be a coward, just as one can be a brilliant concert pianist and hopeless at cooking. But there is a different way of drawing the analogy which Annas exploits. Expertise in any complex skill involves the ability to do a number of things which, once you have mastered the rudiments, have to be integrated in the exercise of the skill. No matter how good your fingering and ability to play very quickly, you won’t be able to play the piano really well if you are not much good at interpretation and frequently choose the wrong tempo for a passage. Having “expertise” in virtue is being able to act really well, mindful of the limits that one virtue sets on another (it is not kind to conceal a painful truth from someone who needs to know it), and intelligently integrating the initially conflicting demands they may make in the mixed circumstances which life throws up. If your acquisition of one or more of the virtues is inadequate, you will sometimes make wrong choices; for “full, proper virtue”, you need them all, as a unified package.

Now this claim, like the earlier one that one can acquire virtue only through continuously seeking to understand what the virtues require of one, sets the standard very high. It is an ideal which we know in advance will never be reached. However, as Annas points out, the ideal in no way debars us from recognizing and admiring virtue in everyday life; it simply reminds us not to be complacent about our own or others’ virtue, never assuming that we now know everything about it that one needs to know. And this seems quite right.

That acquiring a virtue, like acquiring a skill, is acquiring the ability to respond with reason, intelligently, to different circumstances, does not mean that a virtuous response cannot be spontaneous and unreflective. Indeed, the analogy with skills illuminates the way in which it can be. Think of seeing an ace tennis player recovering from an unexpected skid on the grass with a twist of their body that gets them into just the right position to flip the ball back over the net in a winning shot. We do not imagine for a moment that they thought “Now if I twist it that way then I won’t be able to reach the ball, and if I twist it that other way then . . . but if I twist it this way . . .”. We assume that they moved the way they did “without thinking”. But, ascribing the success of the movements to the skill, we do not regard the movements as thoughtless, as we would if a beginner happened to pull off a similar shot. We recognize them as informed by thought, as an intelligent response, born of the skill. And so it is with the virtuous when they manifest their skill by, say, immediately coming up with exactly the needed words to comfort someone in distress.

Annas does more with the skill analogy than I have been able to sketch above, but this review would be incomplete without some mention of her discussion of the second idea the ancient Greeks explicitly had about virtue, namely that it is plausible to think of virtue as part of the agent’s happiness.

As Annas explains, in ancient ethics the fundamental question is the Socratic one – “How should we live?” or “What should our lives be like?”. We all want our lives to go well, and hope that we and our children (and indeed everyone, in an ideal world) will have good lives. In that sense, everyone wants happiness. The Socratic question urges each of us to step back from the quotidian events of our life, and reflect on it as a whole, its past and its future. Is it indeed going well, and in the right direction? Am I indeed living the way I should if I am to achieve a happy life?

Drawing particularly on Aristotle, Annas reveals how such reflection might go. If we are not living haphazardly, we are no doubt already structuring our lives around various long-term goals – maintaining our health, our career, our family life – and we may well think that achieving these goals will be achieving happiness. But, if we do so, we have probably overlooked the fact that we are not pursuing these goals by any means, fair or foul. If we are the sort of people who have picked up Annas’s book, it has probably never crossed our minds that we might preserve our health by buying someone else’s kidney on the black market, or further our career by chicanery. Once that fact is brought to our attention, we see, perhaps to our surprise, that we are thinking of a happy life as one in which we achieve certain things in a certain way, namely, in accordance with virtue. It’s not solely having “the good things in life” that constitutes happiness: virtue is part of it too.

We see this more clearly, perhaps, when we reflect on how we raise our children, and what we hope for them. We take ourselves to be preparing them for life by inculcating the beginnings of the skills we think they will need to make it go well. We aim to equip them to make intelligent choices about what their long-term goals will be, to pursue those goals in the right way, and to cope with adverse circumstances in their lives. Without imposing determinate goals on them, there are some aims, such as having a good family life and close relationships, which we particularly want to give them the skills to achieve if they choose to. And going back to the skill analogy, the virtues are just such skills. Overall, virtue is what enables its possessor to live well; it is “the art (in the sense of ‘skill’) of living”.


Rosalind Hursthouse is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Auckland. She is the author of On Virtue Ethics, 2001, and articles on contemporary ethical theory and Aristotle.