Smith, Michael, review of Virtues and reasons

Goodness within reason
Michael Smith
Published: 19 July 1996
V IRTUES AND REASONS - PHILIPPA FOOT AND MORAL THEORY. Edited by Rosalind Hursthouse, Gavin Lawrence and Warren Quinn. 350pp. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Pounds 35. - 0 19 824046 5.

Philippa Foot has long been identified with the view that moral requirements and requirements of rationality are utterly distinct. Someone may be morally required to act in a certain way, and know this to be so, and yet have no reason whatsoever to act in that way. So Foot argued in her widely reprinted paper, “Morality as a System of Hypothetical Imperatives”.

Foot’s identification with this idea is, however, unfortunate. “Hypothetical Imperatives” came out in the early 1970s, but by the mid-80s Foot had completely changed her mind. She had decided that the conception of human agency taken for granted in “Hypothetical Imperatives” - the Humean conception that permeated all her earlier work - gives us a completely wrong-headed picture of what it is to have a reason. Though she has given many lectures and seminars expounding her new view, very little of this material has yet been published.

Virtues and Reasons: Philippa Foot and moral theory is therefore to be welcomed for more reasons than one. Most obviously, it is fitting that Foot’s salutary influence on moral theory should be celebrated by such a fine set of papers. 

Rosalind Hursthouse, Anthony Kenny, David Sachs and Bernard Williams engage with Foot’s views in normative ethics. G. E. M. Anscombe, Simon Blackburn, Gavin Lawrence, John McDowell, Warren Quinn, T. M. Scanlon, Michael Thompson and David Wiggins all connect, in some way, with Foot’s views about the relations between morality, rationality and virtuous action. And here we find the second reason to welcome the publication of this volume. Given that well over half the papers are critical of the view defended in “Hypothetical Imperatives”, critical for reasons Foot would herself now accept, it is irresistible to see the book as the site of a battle between Foot’s earlier view and her later. But, as these essays show, the view defended in “Hypothetical Imperatives” is difficult indeed to refute. So what was the earlier view?

According to the Humean conception of agency, someone has a reason to act in a certain way only if she has an appropriate desire and belief: for example, someone has a reason to return a book lent to her by a friend only if she desires something - perhaps to please her friend - and only if she believes that she can achieve that thing by returning the book. Without some such appropriate desire and belief pair our imagined agent has no reason to return the book. She has no reason because she is not in a state that is potentially explanatory of her actually returning the book, and reasons, whatever they are, must be states with the potential to explain what people do.

In her earlier work, Foot took this Humean conception of reasons for granted and keenly explored its consequences for morality. The problems arise because, according to the Humean, rationality bears quite differently on desires as opposed to beliefs. Beliefs, which are supposed to be representations of the way the world is, are rationally criticizable. Our imagined agent’s belief that returning the book would cause pleasure in her friend purports to be a representation of the causal structure of the world. If it is true, then she is doing well in her role as a rational, truth-seeking, being. But if it is false, and she is provided with evidence of this, then rationality requires her to give it up. Desires are, however, quite different. They are not representations of the way the world is but rather dispositions to make the world a certain way. Our imagined agent’s desire to please her friend is thus not rationally criticizable - it is not a desire that she rationally should give up - if it so happens that her friend is not pleased. It is rather a state that disposes her to make it the case that her friend is pleased.

Whereas rationality tells us that our beliefs are to match the world, it can thus offer no such prescription vis-a-vis our desires. The function of our desires is to make the world match them. This is not to say that rationality has no purchase on any of our desires. If I desire to please my friend and believe falsely that I can please her by returning the book she lent me - perhaps it was a gift and she will be insulted if I return it - and, as a result, derive a desire to return the book, then my acquired desire to return the book can be criticized for having been derived from a false belief. The desire is one I rationally should give up, in so far as it is derived from a belief I rationally should give up. But when it comes to desires that are not derived from further desires and beliefs, no such criticism is available. All we can say about people who have different unde-rived desires from the ones that we have is that they are different from us. We cannot rationally criticize them in any way, and they cannot rationally criticize us.

Let’s now ask, as Foot did in her earlier work, whether on this view there are reasons to act as morality requires. Since the only people who have such reasons are those who have appropriate desires and beliefs - desires and beliefs that would cause them to act benevolently, justly, kindly and so on - and since it is evident that not everyone has appropriate desires, it follows that not everyone has such reasons. Moral requirements are thus quite different from requirements of rationality. Though we are all morally required to act benevolently, justly, kindly and the like, quite independently of what we happen to desire, and though we may all know this to be so, some of us may have no reason whatsoever to do what we thus believe we are morally required to do. 

What we have reason to do is crucially dependent on what we desire, and the desires we have may simply not be satisfied by doing what morality requires of us.

At the time Foot wrote there seemed only one way to avoid this conclusion. Her argument takes it for granted that moral requirements have a fairly specific descriptive content: that they are requirements of benevolence, justice, kindness and the like, requirements which are such that, if we all acted upon them, human beings as a species would flourish. But, against this, the early non-cognitivists had argued that moral requirements have no such specific content. They held that people’s moral commitments should be identified with their deepest cares and concerns - their most fundamental desires about how people in general are to behave - and while they agreed that there may be no way of rationally criticizing the moral commitments of another (those who have different fundamental desires about how people are to behave are merely different from each other, not more or less rational), they insisted that each person does at least have a reason to act in accordance with their own moral comitmitments.

However, Foot had already undertaken a devastating critique of the early non-cognitivists. She had persuasively argued for the senselessness of supposing that someone could take themselves to be morally required to, say, run around trees anti-clockwise, not for any further reason, but simply as such. It is senseless, she argued, precisely because doing so does not connect in any way with human flourishing. But since this is what someone might most deeply care about, the early non-cognitivists were nonsensically committed to the possibility that someone might take acting in such a way to be morally required. She therefore concluded that we must accept an account of morality, like her own, which connects morality with human flourishing by definition. She conceded that there may be more than one way of spelling out the content of morality consistently with this constraint, and that we therefore cannot rule out the possibility of a limited moral relativism. But, she argued, we can rule out the “anything goes” attitude of the non-cognitivists as incoherent.

In her earlier work Foot took positive delight in her conclusion. She went so far as to compare moral requirements to requirements of etiquette. Just as many of us think that some requirements of etiquette are at best silly and at worst dangerous - think of all those who are afraid of being considered rude for taking up opportunities that others consider to be “above their station” - so Foot invited us to suppose that moral requirements might rightly be seen in a similar light by those whose desires would in no way be served by acting morally. She therefore argued that there is something essentially illusory about the apparent bindingness of the moral “ought”. What we believe we morally ought to do is one thing, what we have reason to do is quite another.

This Humean view of morality and its relations to our reasons for action forms the backdrop of many of the essays in Virtues and Reasons: Philippa Foot and moral theory. What are we to say about it? The most obvious thing to say is that, contrary to the Humean, there is nothing incoherent about the idea of rationally criticizing underived desires: we do so all the time. Imagine someone who would acquire a desire to be healthy - a desire that would, in the event, be in no way derived from any further desire that they have - if only they had knowledge of what health is and involves: that is, imagine that their ignorance wholly explains their lack of a desire to be healthy. Then we would ordinarily rationally criticize them for not having a desire to be healthy. 

Ignorance is, after all, an uncontroversial cause of irrational desires. Or imagine someone who is angry and so desires to punch a hole in the wall, but who wouldn’t want themselves to punch a hole in the wall in their angry state if they weren’t angry. Then, once again, we would ordinarily rationally criticize them. When anger is the sole cause of a desire it is, after all, relatively uncontroversial that the desire so caused is irrational.

At the very least, then, we should say that an agent’s having a reason to act in a certain way requires not that he actually has a desire to act in that way, but rather that he would have a desire to act in that way if he were, in some more or less uncontroversial sense, more fully rational: if he were not ignorant, not angry, and so on. But, unfortunately, this minimal amendment to the Humean’s view is insufficient to undermine Foot’s argument. It is insufficient because there is no guarantee that agents would all want the same thing if they were, in some relatively uncontroversial sense, fully rational. 

Indeed, the amended account of what it is to have a reason doesn’t even guarantee that the question “What do we have reason to do?” is a sensible question to ask. Perhaps we should ask what John has reason to do, what Mary has reason to do, and so on, and be prepared to accept different answers in each case, answers that reflect not just their different circumstances, but also their different personalities, concerns and enculturations. Far from all of us having a reason to act benevolently, justly, kindly and the like, the proposed amendment thus doesn’t even guarantee that there are any actions that we all have reason to perform. In this respect, the amended Humean view is just like the unamended version.

Here, accordingly, lies the real difficulty to be faced by those interested in refuting the Humean view of reasons Foot took for granted early on. On the one hand they need to explicate or analyse the concept of a reason for action in some relatively uncontroversial way. This forces them to concede what was plausible in the Humean view: reasons must connect in some way with motivation, and so facts about reasons, even if they are not simply facts about our actual desires, must be facts which connect in some way with our desires: perhaps facts about the desires we would have in a more fully rational state. But, on the other hand, the analysis must also guarantee that if there are any reasons at all then they are reasons that we all share. It must not itself entail a kind of relativism about reasons. Yet it is by no means easy to see how any analysis of reasons for action could do both of these things at once.

Viewed from this perspective, the papers in the volume have much to offer. 

Blackburn defends a more sophisticated non-cognitivism. He argues that the non-cognitivist’s essential insight is simply that moral requirements must be grounded, in some way, in the cares and concerns of agents, and he demonstrates why nothing Foot says about morality counts against this essential insight. 

Scanlon, whose agreement with Foot is more thoroughgoing, thinks it none the less needs to be shown why those who accept her account of moral requirements don’t have their commitment to morality undermined, given that her account leaves open the possibility of moral relativism. The remaining papers - those by Anscombe, Lawrence, McDowell, Quinn, Thompson and Wiggins - all take issue more directly with Foot’s claim that moral requirements and rational requirements are utterly distinct. Lawrence’s paper elegantly spells out the development of Foot’s views, and offers a diagnosis of where she went wrong, a diagnosis that lays bare the fundamental issue.

According to Lawrence, since rational agents aim at what he calls the “practicable good”, everyone has a reason to act morally if it can be shown that their acting benevolently, justly, kindly and the like is part of the practicable good at which they aim in so far as they are rational. So far so good. However, Lawrence does not attempt to show that this is so. Rather, he contents himself with arguing, convincingly, that rational agents do not simply aim at the satisfaction of their own desires. He thus refutes the unamended Humean view, which in effect equates an agent’s desire-satisfaction with the practicable good at which he aims in so far as he is rational. Unfortunately, however, this means that Lawrence doesn’t ever tell us why the practicable good shouldn’t be given a relativized analysis none the less. Why shouldn’t we suppose that there is no such thing as the practicable good per se - nothing we can aim at in so far as we are rational - but only the practicable good-from-John’s-point-of-view (what John aims at), the practicable good from-Mary’s-point-of-view (what Mary aims at), and so on? After all, that is what the amended Humean view suggests.

Whether the answer to this question is contained in the papers by McDowell, Quinn, Thompson and Wiggins is perhaps best left to the reader to decide. What can be said with some confidence, however, is that an answer is sorely needed if the argument for the rationality of morality is to go through. Those interested in finding the answer will most certainly profit from a close reading of Virtues and Reasons: Philippa Foot and moral theory. They will also greatly profit from reading Foot’s own work on the topic, beginning with her Hart Lecture, “Does Moral Subjectivism Rest on a Mistake?” in the Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, 1995.