{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red20\green20\blue20;\red240\green233\blue228;\red76\green71\blue40;
}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\})}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00);}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc1\levelnfcn1\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{upper-roman\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid102\'02\'01.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid2}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Thesis and Introduction \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Neo-Aristotelianism virtue ethics is the naturalistic ethical theory par excellence. It is a satisfying, powerful 
\i explanation
\i0  of ethical discourse; it is an inspiring, useful 
\i guide
\i0  to living our excellent lives; and, despite objections, it is compatible with all the non-trivial requirements of of a thoroughly naturalistic philosophy. \
Providing excellent arguments for these claims will be the labor of my dissertation.\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Importance\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 The doctrines about humanity, nature, and ethics derived in part from Aristotle are not only significant for their historical place in western civilization but for their contemporary place in debates over moral and normative realism and moral and normative naturalism. Virtue ethics is not the majority view (about 18.2% according to the Chalmers survey) but has a substantial share of allegiance.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Chalmers, \'93What Do Philosophers Believe?\'94 p. 12.
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28   \
The \'93banner\'94 of naturalism, on the other hand, is significant as the contemporary \'93orthodoxy\'94 of public, secular philosophy.  In a field where disagreement is virtually a requirement, the \'93metaphilosophy of naturalism\'94 boasts the allegiance of a full half (49.8%) of analytic philosophers.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Chalmers, \'93What Do Philosophers Believe?\'94 p. 12.
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  \
Is neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics really naturalistic? The answer to this question will be highly interesting to naturalists and nonnaturalists in the metaethical debate over the foundations of ethics. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Background on Aristotelianism and Neo-Aristotelianism\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1

\b0 \cf0 	Virtue ethics has undergone a renaissance in the last 60 years or so. Neo-Aristotelieanism is still a protean concept, but I take it to be a set of ethical doctrines about happiness, virtue, human flourishing, and practical wisdom. \
	Of course, there is a metaphysical framework for such an ethical theory. Every natural object has a natural end or \'93final cause.\'94 Thus, happiness is the natural end of human life. \
	Beyond this, Aristotle, taught, the life worth living is the happy (
\i eudaimon
\i0 ) life characterized by virtuous activity, especially practical wisdom. The virtuous man or woman is happy, or well on the way (depending on whether virtue is merely necessary or also sufficient condition for happiness). The happy person is not simply 
\i morally good 
\i0 in the thin sense, but achieves both \'93theoretical and practical\'94 virtues (we might say \'93epistemic and moral\'94 virtues). Calling virtuous persons \'93phronomos\'94 or practically wise denotes more than calling them \'93good\'94. Practical wisdom does not merely denote the knowledge of morally wrong actions 
\i one must not do 
\i0 and categorical duties 
\i one must fulfill
\i0 ; it denotes the property of being excellent at identifying the proper reasons for doing things, the knowledge of 
\i what to do. 
\i0 The 
\i phronemos 
\i0 person fulfills her duties and does not violate the rights of others, but also she is well-ordered within herself, and intelligently situated within her community and even the cosmos. 
\i  
\i0 Virtuous activity is a sort of master skill, a skill both responsive and active in turns, that unifies many virtues into one coherent, balanced, musical way of living each day.\
	Happiness is defined in terms of virtue. What is virtue? The particular virtues are character traits (like dispositions, deeply-seated habits, or skills) that contribute to well-being or happiness. The virtues are commonly listed out: the Greek big four are justice, courage, practical wisdom, moderation. Alternatively, we might add to the list 
\i any
\i0  character trait that passes the test, that can be shown to guarantee or contribute to a good human life (like compassion? humility? ambition?). The list of virtues is certainly topic of some controversy, but the controversy is or should be \'93in house\'94 controversy. That is, for present purposes we should focus on those lists that are relatively uncontroversial (does anyone think justice is a vice or recklessness a virtue?). But of course, those who incline toward virtue ethics can undertake the worthwhile task of comparing and contrasting differences amongst contemporary writers, differences between old and new lists, between eastern and western virtues, religious and secular  virtues, and so on. But I shall leave these esoterica for future research. In my dissertation, I shall refer to the relatively undisputed Greek set of virtues, and add a few \'93modern\'94 virtues that I dare hope will not be stumbling blocks.\
	Now, so called neo-Aristotelians have been offering their theory as a form of ethical naturalism. Neo-Aristotelians freely differ from that Athenian whenever his opinions seem plain wrong in light of our modern worldview. But they agree with much of the above set of primary ethical theses. Nature is teleological; humanity is continuous with nature; human nature has a pre-defined end; that end is (something like) happiness or flourishing
\i ; 
\i0  and our evaluative judgments of particular humans track (or try to track) how well a person is realizing that human end. These doctrines together may be categorized as a kind of naturalistic, metanormative realism. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Background on Naturalism and Ethical Naturalism\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1

\b0 \cf0 	What is naturalism per se? Naturalism is, if it were possible, an even more nebulous movement. The term gestures at a family of doctrines, attitudes, methods, social groups. For instance, it is used to refer to doctrines (a belief in the continuity of nature and the fundamental unity of the sciences), attitudes (a high degree of trust in modern scientific inquiries, an optimism about scientific research into human nature), skepticism about religion (from the yawning apathy of Colin McGinn, to the vociferous denial of Michael Ruse), methods (the scientific methods, empiricism, pragmatism), and even social groups (as a banner for atheists, a banner for the empirically-minded). \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\fi360\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Is there anything that unifies these disparate senses of the term? \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Naturalism is, I think, hopelessly equivocal, and yet \'91naturalism\'92 is also a powerful by-word, a signal word, and means 
\i something 
\i0 to almost everybody in philosophy. We cannot simply retire it without rendering opaque a great body of literature from the past two hundred or so years. But we cannot, I submit, continue to use it without rendering opaque our inquiries into science, epistemology, ethics, and more. \
Giving an intelligible account of naturalism \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
is something I will undertake in the dissertation. For now, let us be content with giving the \'93spirit\'94 of naturalism and its contrast to non-naturalism: naturalists place a high degree of trust in the sciences for learning about nature but also human nature including ethics and normativity. \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0  Non-naturalism, which judges that some non-scientific ways of knowing normative facts are available to us and/or that some unscientific entities exist (be they supernatural gods and Cartesian souls or preternatural ghosts). Alternately, nonnaturalists simply affirm that some norms are authoritatively binding, not attitude-dependent, and inexplicable in the language of \'93natural\'94 (non-normative) terms.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Finlay, Stephen. \'93Four Faces of Moral Realism\'94 p. 19-20. 
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  
\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1

\b0 \cf0 	Ethical naturalism has two very different branches, one broad and one narrow.
\f1\fs24 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs30 This is the view Papineau summarizes.  Papineau, David, "Naturalism", 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
(Spring 2009 Edition), Edward N. Zalta\'a0(ed.), URL = <http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2009/entries/naturalism/>.
\f1\fs24 \cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 Most broadly, the wider family of non-cognitivist and anti-realist theories that are compatible with naturalism per se, including emotivism, prescriptivism, expressivism, error theory, factionalism.  I call all  these non-cognitivist and error-theoretic theories under the pejorative term \'91nihilism\'92. Nihilists argue that statements in our normative discourse are either not genuinely assertoric or they are massively mistaken in some way.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Rosen, \'93Objectivity and Modern Idealism\'94 p. 278.
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28   These views I take to be disastrously false. Views that can be shown to entail nihilism, can be shown to reduce to absurdity. Nevertheless, nihilistic views are helpful as heuristics and correctives. The nihilist, for one, correctly identifies the \'93objectionable features\'94 of normative facts and true normative judgments. Normative facts purport to be intrinsically motivating, normative judgments purport to be categorically binding, and so on. These features do need a satisfactory analysis within naturalistic realism.\
	More narrowly, ethical naturalism denotes a family of cognitivist, moral or normative realisms. Some moral or otherwise normative facts exist and so some of our evaluative terms are intelligible; some moral or otherwise normative judgments are true, Ethical and otherwise normative facts are 
\i real
\i0  but belong not to some supernatural or platonic realm; they somehow belong to nature. All facts are natural facts in some to-be-determined sense of 
\i natural. 
\i0  \
	The various ways to parse this claim give various definitions of nature and various accounts of the relation of \'93dependence\'94 or \'93belonging to\'94 nature: normative facts supervene on nonnormative facts; normative facts emerge from nonnormative ones; nonnormative facts ground normative facts; normative facts just 
\i are 
\i0 nonnormative facts differently understood, and so on. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1

\b \cf0 Metaethics and ethics
\b0 \
	The debate about naturalism versus nonnaturalism is a metaethical debate. The received wisdom is that our commitment to primary ethical and normative concepts (duty, virtue, pleasure, the divine will, rationality, etc.) are non-trivially distinct from our metaethical story about the foundations of ethical and normative concepts. We might both be consequentialists or virtue ethicists but give different accounts of the metaphysics of pleasure or analysis of normative words. This received wisdom is wise.\
	Yet t\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
he connection between one\'92s metaethical and primary ethical positions is not random. Matthew Kramer has argued that moral realism is a (first-order) moral doctrine.\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\super \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub  Thomas Nagel agrees by arguing that the only way to argue for moral realism is to keep focussed on the normative \'93weight\'94 of primary ethical values \'97 we must refuse to get lost in the metaethical quandaries for too long.  Perhaps this is related to Margaret Little persuasive argument that caring about the ethical issue is (in some cases) not a bias but an aid to seeing the salient facts.\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\super \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub  An animal rights activist, say, who cares strongly about the unjust suffering of industrial farm animals might appeal to metaethical arguments to defend her normative realism, but her opponents should not accuse her of \'93caring too much\'94 to be \'93objective.\'94 If Hursthouse and McDowell\'92s argument that ethical facts can only be seen from \'93inside\'94 an ethical standpoint is true then the attempt to see moral facts from an \'93outside\'94 perspective is not just misguided but ethically risky.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0  	Furthermore, some primary ethical theories \'93fit\'94 better with some metaethical theories. Ethical naturalism of a more reductive or scientific flavor fits best with consequentialism. Ethical non-naturalism bets fits with ethical platonism or theism. Ethical naturalism of the non-reductive sort seems to me to an overwhelmingly good fit for virtue ethics. So combining ethical naturalism with neo-Aristotelianism we come up with neo-Aristotelian naturalism. My primary research question asks: is neo-Aristotelianism sufficiently naturalistic? \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Neo-Aristotelianism seems naturalistic enough \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0  The generally accepted answer is 
\i yes. 
\i0 Thus, Rosalind Hursthouse:  \'93\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Virtue ethics, or at least any form of it that takes its inspiration from Aristotle, is usually taken to be a form of ethical naturalism\'97broadly, the enterprise of basing ethics in some way on considerations of human nature, on what is involved in being good 
\i qua
\i0  human being.\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Hursthouse, 
\i On Virtue Ethics  
\i0 p. 192. 
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Elizabeth Anscombe who ignited the modern revival of neo-Arisotetelianism in ethics offered virtue concepts as alternatives to inherently theistic concepts like law and absolutely binding obligation. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Philippa Foot\'92s attitude to establishing her naturalistic credentials is far more sanguine. She merely aims to account for evaluations of humans as logically and grammatically identical to evaluations about animals and plants. (The influence of Wittgenstein can be clearly seen in her strong emphasis on natural language and her occasional lack of curiosity about metaphysics.) John McDowell avers that his brand of neo-Aristotelianism about ethics is naturalistic, though he is compelled to distinguish between a more reductive sort of naturalism and a more \'93relaxed\'94 sort. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Neo-Aristotelianism does not seem naturalistic enough \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	But \'93general acceptance\'94 is not justification. \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Some have worried that a traditional virtue ethic and a thoroughgoing naturalism are incompatible or at least uneasy bedfellows. Depending on how we define naturalism, the question can be specified a few ways: Can we learn about human nature, human virtue, human happiness, and practical wisdom (and even become virtuous, wise, and happy) from natural sciences? Are virtue properties natural properties? Are happy persons natural entities? \
	And especially, is human nature continuous with nature? Some ethical naturalists are content to relegate all value to humanity (all value thought and talk) and leave it at that. I do not think this kind of \'93naturalizing\'94 is in the spirit of naturalism. \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Naturalism it seems is more ambitious than to be content with just \'93basing ethics in some way on\'85 human nature.\'94\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0  Can virtue ethics be harmonized with the naturalistic approaches? \
	The worry can be teased out into four related objections. Each highlights a real or apparent tension between unmodified virtue ethics and unmodified naturalism. \
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	1)	}
\b Divinity objection: 
\b0 Virtue ethics has been traditionally the purview of theists, from the divine nous of Aristotle to the divine logos of the Stoics to the divine Trinity of Aquinas, and orthodox naturalism tends to be atheistic, agnostic, or post-theist (apathetic).  If we come to believe that humans participate in the divine nous, are indwelt by a divine spark, or made in the image of God, it seems that we have left naturalism far behind. \
{\listtext	2)	}
\b Teleology objection: 
\b0 Virtue ethics assumes or argues for teleology in nature, without which evaluations of living things including humans cannot get off the ground. An individual cactus or deer is evaluated by how well it instantiates the lifeform of its species. By contrast, Darwinism or neo-Darwinism is orthodox biology that is committed, it seems, to the view of disenchanted nature as a mono-causal order of efficient and material causation without final causation.  The orthodox \'93transformism\'94 that has held majority sway since Darwin implies that lifeforms are essentially plastic or fluid, which entails that deviation from the norm may be a defect or simply a new adaptive mutation. 
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Marinus Ferreira, \'93Reasons from Neo-Aristotelian Naturalism\'94
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28    Stephen Brown articulates the objection that there may not even be a human lifeform, in which case the basis for ethical and other normative evaluations is gone. 
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Stephen Brown, \'93Really Naturalizing Virtue\'94, 
\i Ethic@, 
\i0 Vol. 4., n. , P. 7-22, 2005. 
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  \
{\listtext	3)	}
\b Normative human nature objection: 
\b0 Virtue ethics also assumes that human nature or the human lifeform is so to speak normatively loaded. The very term 
\i virtue 
\i0 (a cognate of the Latin word for 
\i man
\i0 ) implies that 
\i humanity 
\i0 is a normative concept; a human can become fully human or inhuman. That is, one can fail to achieve one\'92s own humanity or one can become truly human.  Some ethical naturalists also put themselves at risk of this objection, when they ground normative facts and \'93queer\'94 values in humanity as if that were enough. For instance, Hursthouse says hers is an  enterprise of basing ethics in some way on considerations of human nature, on what is involved in being good qua human being\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Hursthouse 193.
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  Consequentialists try to demystify \'93queer\'94 values by grounding them in humanity somehow (our interests, desires, judgments, evaluations, natural ends, etc.). The assumption is that human nature is \'93natural\'94, so if values are \'93humanized\'94 then values become natural. But the shoe could fit the other foot. A critic could object that values are nonnatural so if values are humanized then human nature is nonnatural. Quite possibly, humanizing these mysterious values doesn\'92t naturalize them, but rather mystifies humanity. By contrast, \'93A fundamental tenet of naturalism is that human beings are continuous with nature\'94.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Brown 2004, p. 4
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 . McDowell sees the parity between reason and practical reason, and so naturalizes both in \'93second nature.\'94 Others, like Stephen Brown, not to be deterred want to naturalize human nature too. The point is that if humanity is discontinuous with nature then we seem to have a bi-furcated naturalism that violates the continuity of nature.\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	4)	}Discontinuity of rationality objection: 
\b0 Virtue ethics seems to elevate the status of humanity above other animals and perhaps the rest of nature. More specifically, it tends to make reason and practical reason \'93special\'94 or discontinuous with nature. For instance, Julia Annas asks: \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93Does \'85[a strong] relation between our rationality and the rest of our human nature as social animals give us a plausible form of 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
naturalism
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
? We might think not, if we think that the Aristotelian form is a plausible one. For it stresses continuities between the evaluative patterns in our lives and those that are to be found in the lives of plants and animals. The fact that we are rational animals makes a big difference\'85\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Annas, \'93What kind of naturalism?\'94
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 She notes that the more we emphasize our rationality, the less important appears that which we share with the rest of nature (our animality and materiality). She seems to endorse the stronger form of rationality despite the tension. Stephen Brown on the other hand is willing to bite the bullet that some or all of the normative authority of our rationality might be lost if we concede that humans are really continuous with plants and animals. He somewhat regretfully admits (while defending neo-Aristotelian naturalism!) that his uncompromisingly naturalistic virtue ethic \'93amounts to a kind of evolutionary ethics and, in the end, is fundamentally descriptive\'94 
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Brown, 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Moral Virtue and Nature
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 1.
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 He notes that the more we emphasize our common ancestry, our basic biological animality and (ultimately) origin of all living things in non-living chemicals and elements, the less important appears our normative rationality.  \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
	These four related worries individually and together pose a serious threat to neo-Aristotelianism. The threat is both dialectical and rhetorical, since they threaten the theory\'92s truth as well as (even if it is true) its palatability and plausibility to the thousands of philosophers who are naturalists. (Alternately, they pose a threat to naturalism, threatening to prove it false or make it seem implausible to neo-Aristotelians.)\

\i \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1

\i0\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Three responses
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
	The general feeling is that there is an \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 inverse proportionality between unmodified 
\i naturalism 
\i0 (denying divinity, teleology, affirming the continuity of human nature and rationality with the rest of nature) and the degree of unmodified 
\i Aristotelianism 
\i0 (affirming the teleology of nature, humanity\'92s normative nature, our rationality and practical rationality, and divinity). \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Therefore, three possible responses to the tension reveal themselves. (1) neo-Aristotelianism is naturalistic even without modification, and so much the worse for naturalism; or (2) Neo-Aristotelianism is not naturalistic without modification, and so much the worse for virtue ethics; or (3) both have to be modified (\'93neo\'94-Aristotelianism and \'93relaxed\'94 naturalism) but a real compromise is possible. \
	(1) The first response just accepts Aristotelianism without worrying about the divinity, teleology, human nature, or rationality objections. It accepts, for example, the following truth claims: \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 we can learn about happiness, virtue, and wisdom (and maybe even become virtuous, wise, and happy) in a manner consistent with natural scientific study, especially evolutionary biology, anthropology, but also perhaps perhaps psychology, sociology, economics, politics.  Virtue properties, when they obtain, are natural properties. E.g., practical wisdom is a natural feature of some human beings; courage, justice, magnanimity etc., are natural features of some human beings.  A happy human is a natural fact, like a thriving oak tree or healthy lion.  Human nature is continuous with all of nature because it is just another animal nature. A person expressing human nature in its fullness, is continuous with nature because he or she is a living thing. Knowledge and value, reason and practical reason, epistemology and ethics, are continuous with psychology, biology, etc. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	(2) The second response just rejects Aristotle\'92s framework outright on the basis of one or more of those objections. Those who take this response rummage through the other available forms of ethical naturalism for another brand of moral realism or else gives up on moral realism altogether. Perhaps other objections also come into play: The very concept of virtue is undercut by modern evolutionary biology.
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\{\\Scrv_fn=
\f2\fs30 Williams, Bernard. \'93Evolution, Ethics, and the Representation Problem\'94 in 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Making S ense of H umanity, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
1995. 
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\f1 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Virtue is inherently hierarchical, and hence elitist, sexist, undemocratic, and so on. Virtue is tainted both by its origin in pre-modern and oft-times religious origins. \
	(3) The third response \'97 really, a family of solutions \'97 finds a compromise. This is the solution of John McDowell and Rosalind Hursthouse. They note the same tension above between robust moral realism that captures normative authority and the straightforward reductive account of nature, human nature, and rationality that seems to abolish it. Hursthouse says, \'93The pretensions of an Aristotelian naturalism are not, in any ordinary understanding of the terms, either \'91scientific\'92 or \'91foundational\'92. It does not seek to establish its conclusions from \'91a neutral point of view\'92.\'94 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Hursthouse 193.
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 This third way sees nature as \'93partially re-enchanted\'94. The question is whether this third way is possible.  \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
My contribution
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
	I aim to adjudicate between these options in my dissertation. Not only answering the questions in the terms posed, but questioning the governing assumptions in the literature, I aim to sort out definitions, clear truth claims, objections, and responses on each of these topics, in order to  allow naturalists to decide clearly the theoretical costs and benefits of adopting neo-Aristotelianism as their preferred form of ethical realism. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 	Combining ethical naturalism with neo-Aristotelianism we can indeed defend a naturalistic virtue ethics. In short, neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics is both an adequate ethic and adequate metaethic for naturalists and non-naturalists \'97  it is true as a metaethic and useful as an ethics. \cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Chapter Outline\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	To establish my thesis that \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Neo-Aristotelianism is the naturalistic ethical theory par excellence even for secular philosophers will require three parts. In the first part, I have to take seriously an apathy about virtue ethics and explain why neo-Aristotlianism is so attractive as an ethic and as a metaethic. In the second part, I shall critique rival ethical naturalisms. And in the third part, I shall respond to the four objections listed above, offer a novel definition of naturalism that allows even naturalist philosophers to enjoy the many benefits of neo-Aristotelianism. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1

\i \cf0 	
\i0 In part 1, In chapter 1, I do
\i  
\i0 some background work has to be done to show that building a compromise is even worthwhile. This will be done through a novel presentation of four metaethical explananda we are trying to explain with our metaethical theories. Moral or otherwise normative antirealists will view all this fuss as needless. Normative discourse is not truth-apt, or it is but universally fails to represent normative facts. So some account is needed to motivate moral realism. (Thankfully, I can stand on astonishing body of good work on moral realism in recent decades.) \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
These explananda, I shall argue, are real phenomena that stand in need of a morally realist explanation. \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
	In part 1, chapter 2,  I shall provide a a clear and detailed presentation of the metaethical and primary ethical tenets of (my version of) the virtue ethics in question. I briefly tell the story of virtue ethics\'92 reception before and since the Enlightenment, and highlight some important distinctions among modern neo-Aristotelian virtue ethicists like Anscombe, Foot, Hursthouse, McDowell and Smith. Morally realist ethical naturalists of various stripes (consequentialists, reductive physicalists, quietests, etc.)  will wonder what is all the fuss about Aristotle. So we need to motivate why it is worthwhile revisiting the old philosopher. This account shows neo-Aristotelianism\'92s power as an explanans, a power that contains rather than competes with deontological considerations (about the rationality of morality) and utilitarian considerations (about the consequences of right action). \
This exposes in starker relief how the worry about naturalism justifiably arises especially in regards to the relation of human nature to the rest of the cosmos. These worries are summarized in my four objections. \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 	In part 2, chapter 3, I critique other ethical naturalisms. There are many, but the main options I consider are: strict or reductive naturalism (i.e., physicalism like that of Frank Jackson\'92s), the scientific consequentialism of Richard Boyd and the Cornell Realists.  I also briefly consider the sort of rationalistic quietism of Thomas Nagel. I shall object to each of these theories individually but also critique them all as failing adequately to account for the metaethical explananda laid out in chapter 1. \
	In part 2, chapter 4, I examine in more detail the \'93relaxed\'94 naturalisms of the neo-Aristotelianism of Philippa Foot, John McDowell, and Rosalind Hursthouse. I show that the problem of discontinuity resurfaces with reference to human nature. \
	In part 2, chapter 5, I undertake a novel definition of naturalism. First, I shall offer a clear and detailed definition of the wide variety of naturalisms in an attempt to distill out the core concerns, the 
\i sine qua nons
\i0 , of naturalists. Since the term \'91nature\'92 is the most equivocal and ambiguous in our language, this will necessitate a detour into the concept of \'91nature\'92 and that which often defines it, science.  The demarcation problem for philosophers of science threatens a similar demarcation problem for naturalists, since most philosophers define nature in terms of \'93what science studies.\'94 So naturalism must remain either as indeterminate as the deliverances of science (which does not exclude the \'93supernatural\'94) or must define itself apart from science (which separates it from materialism). In light of this problem, I propose that naturalism commit itself, in light of the past and present successes of empirical inquiry, to the continuity of all of existence and of all knowledge. This commitment is compatible with continuities (like the ancient Stoics) rooted in a divine logos or nous. \
	In part 3, chapter 6, I revisit the four objections in light of our new definition of naturalism and offer a persuasive answer as to whether neo-Aristotelianism falls under those criteria. The conclusions I draw are as follows: (1) I concede that virtue ethics fits well with theism but argue that it is compatible with atheism; (2) I argue that virtue ethics is necessarily teleological, and so that teleology is compatible with naturalism. (3) I defend the normativity of human nature and argue that naturalism must adopt normativity; (4) I argue that virtue ethics is necessarily non-reductively rational and that rationalism can and should adopt this, and that it does not violate the continuity of nature. \
	In part 3, chapter 7, I shall address any dangling objections or possible misgivings, summarize my positive conclusions, and search out any gaps or weaknesses in my arguments that might need supplementation. \
\
The proposed outline, then, is as follows:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	I.	}Why Metanormative Realism and Virtue?\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	1.	}Metanormative Realism and Nihilism\
{\listtext	2.	}Contemporary Virtue Ethics and Four Objections\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	II.	}Is Human Nature part of Nature? \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	1.	}Scientific Ethics? The Bald Naturalism of Jackson, Boyd\
{\listtext	2.	}\'93Second Nature\'94 Non-Reductive Naturalism of Nagel, McDowell, Hursthouse\
{\listtext	3.	}Nature and Science: The Demarcation Problem for Naturalism\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	III.	}Naturalistic Neo-Aristotelianism?\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	1.	}The Four Objections Answered: The Continuity problem solved\
{\listtext	2.	}Clarifications, Implications, Objections, and conclusions\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \
}