{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
The most fundamental thesis of *After Virtue's* many important claims is that teleology is natural to human practice. Human life is composed of end-directed practices. Human practices are composed of intelligible end-directed actions. So human life is thoroughly teleological. Even absent Aristotle's metaphysical biology of final causation, MacIntyre argues, human practice is and can be demonstrably shown to be teleological through reflection upon the phenomenology of action. \
Charles Taylor agrees:\
>MacIntyre shows how the growing sense among many different schools of modern philosophy that no 'ought' canb e derived from an 'is' is not the slow dawning of a context-free logical truth, but rather the correlate of the decline or rejection of the conception central to much ancient philosophy that human life was defined by a telos.[@taylor 16]\
For the ancients, the human telos was defined by human nature. To us, such a definition may sound odd. For us, nature does not define *any* teloi. If, however, part of a thing's nature is its formal and final properties, then by definition part of our human nature is our formal properties (perhaps our capacity for rationality, language use, concept use, practical rationality, society, etc.) and our final properties (our search for the good, for happiness, for full self-actualization, or what have you). \
Stanley Hauerwas puts a similar point this way: that intelligible action is a more primary notion than action. The category of "action" simpliciter -- whether intelligible or not -- is not a basic, value-free category which subdivides into "action->intelligible" and "action->unintelligible." Rather, an intelligible action is the basic, value-laden category. An action *aims* for something; to aim at a target entails at least the conceptual possibility of not hitting the target. The very concept of an intelligible action -- e.g., planting a seed, petting a dog, greeting a friend, opening a bottle, dancing at a wedding, writing a lecture, -- is that of an agent acting *for a purpose* or to achieve an end. And our normal human life is made up of intelligible actions. \
The immediate objection that springs to mind upon hearing the suggestion that teleology is "natural" is the belief that nature is telos-free. And, it is thought, that belief is justified by modern science or is most consonant with other beliefs justifed by modern science. To borrow a bit from scriptural theologian Rudolf Bultmann, perhaps \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
"it is impossible to use electrical light and the wireless and to avail ourselves of modern medical and surgical discoveries, and at the same time to believe in [Aristotle's world of final causes and natural purposes].\'94\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 [@bultmann1961kerygma 5] \
\
Suppose that modernity is a moral disaster. \
\
MacIntyre explains the present disastrous state of things through the modern rejection of telos. Teleological nihilism as we might call the view that there are no real, natural teloi. There may be teloi but they are all features of 
\i us, 
\i0 not features of the external world. They may be psychological projections upon the world that appear incorrigibly to be features of the real, natural world. But reflection can, somehow, expose this appearance as illusion. \
\
The recovery of telos, Taylor points out, may be undertaken in one of two ways. Both ways fundamentally agree with MacIntyre\'92s diagnosis of modernity and agree with the prognosis that we must recovery our belief \'97 acknowledgment of \'97 teloi. But the tension between the two ways represents and important crux upon which even MacIntyre\'92s sympathizers must align themselves. \
\
The first way of recovering telos is to identify those tenets of teleological nihilism explicit or implicit in characteristically modern doctrines and to reject both those tenets and the doctrines with which they are intertwined. This is an amputation surgery. The doctrine is infected by teleological nihilism and must be removed. \
\
The second way of recovering telos is to chart those tenets of teleological nihilism explicit or implicit in characteristically modern doctrines and reject the teleological nihilism but retain, in modified form certainly, but retain improved versions of the doctrines in which they were formerly intertwined. This is a tumorectomy. The doctrine is infected by teleological nihilism may be saved, even cured, by the removal of the offending tenet (followed by whatever curative or restorative work might be needed).\
\
Let\'92s look at an example. \
\
One doctrine of modernity is the idealization and glorification of \'93disengaged freedom.\'94 According to Taylor, the concept of freedom assumed in modernity is that of procedural rationality. Rationality is not a substantial concept defined by say, the acknowledgement of an external world or the belief that I am a human being rather than an archangel. Similarly, ethics is procedural, not substantive. The Kantian ethic of rule-following is abstract, rational, universal, and identical for each rational agent. The same rule followed by different agents is supposed to produce the same end. In this way, the freedom of moral agency is identical with obedience to moral rules. The Aristotelian conception of ethics is more substantive \'97 practical rationality must embrace some goods before and during procedural analysis or means-end instrumental reasoning. \
This view of the substantive good of freedom seems\'85 good. At least to moderns. Can this view of the substantive good of freedom be saved? Or is it a casualty of a restoration of Aristotelian tradition?\
}