{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
## Introduction ##\
\
Alasdair MacIntyre is a highly influential moral and political philosopher. Martha Nussbaum said\
\
His many books and articles have addressed ethics from a historical perspective, arguing that socially-embedded traditions both constitute and are constituted by their ethical concepts. MacIntyre may be classified as an analytic philosopher and virtue ethicist, but he denies both labels. He has refused to restrict himself neatly to one style, school of thought, or subject. Instead, he has written as a philosopher about analytic philosophy, virtue ethics, the history of philosophy, continental philosophy, Marxism, Christianity, university education, political science, philosophy of science, and epistemology. His work often draws on sociology, psychology, and literature for its themes and illustrations. For example, he argues that emotivism is not only a metaethical theory of moral language but a \'93culture\'94 with its own paradigmatic institutional expressions, like bureaucracy and therapy. \
\
In spite of (or perhaps because of) this multifaceted oeuvre, MacIntyre has had enormous and interdisciplinary influence. Weinstein observes that Macintyre did for ethics what Rawls did for political philosophy; he re-invigorated ethical philosophy by attending to its history.[@weinstein2003macintyre chapter 4.] Where Rawls re-invigorated political philosophy, \'93inaugurating the dominance of late twentieth-century liberalism. Hundreds, if not thousands of articles have responded to Rawls\'92 work, and the rest of the century saw a flood of books on every nuance of liberal theory.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 38] \
}