{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \'93Teleological ethics\'94 was taken, especially a decade or two ago, to contrast with deontological ethics and to refer to utilitarianism.[@louden1984vices 227] Teleology then means simply that the utilitarian aims to achieve some end \'97 happiness, pleasure, utility, or what have you. Thus understood, virtue theorists seem to be utilitarians whose primary concern is the character of moral agents rather than the acts moral agents perform or the rules they obey. But this is a misunderstanding. \
\
Teleological ethics of the sort that concerns Anscombe (and concerns us in these chapters) is not a matter of a posteriori, statistical analyses of character traits or actions or rules and their respective consequences aimed at reliably hitting the target by consistently bringing about the cause. Teleological ethics is about unfolding the inner form of a thing; actualizing its inherent or intrinsic telos. This process of self-realization occurs in all living things, from the smallest bacterium to the largest whale. It does not (at least I shall assume it does not) occur in any non-living thing; there is no teleological, goal-oriented process guiding the development of new solar systems or the destructions of old ones; there is no \'93cosmic ecology\'94 because there is no cosmic ecosystem. The cosmic relation between star and asteroid is more akin to the terrestrial relation between gas and matter than the terrestrial relation between bear and butterfly. \
}