{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## Conclusion: Summary and remaining tasks\
\
In this chapter, I have argued that practical reason is both practical and rational; it is both a kind of knowledge and a definitionally motivating or action-guiding kind of knowledge. Namely, practical reasoning is the process of evaluating and pursuing the good and evaluating and avoiding the bad.\
\
\
The term "moral reasons" is used in two very different ways. First, it is used to refer to practical reasons as a whole, the pursuit of the good. And secondly, it is used to refer to a species of practical reasons pertaining to what is good for others. Disambiguated, it is clear that moral reasons (in the first sense) necessarily motivate us. And moral reasons (in the second sense) do not necessarily motivate us, since they may be countervailed by other reasons. \
\
Resolving the question of "how should one live?" is a complex process of adjudicating between all the available goods known to one, sorting them, ranking them, and forming them into a complete life plan. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\fs28 \cf0 It would seem that Humean assumption of a divorce between practice and reason, or rationality and action, is a common mistake but a mistake nonetheless. To put a fine point on it, the separation of practice and reason is a vice.  It is a moral and intellectual vice that is very common.
\fs24  Nature have given us the power to reason about what is worthwhile and we only do such a power justice when we use to direct our lives. 
\fs28 As T. S. Eliot lamented, in vox dei: "I have given you the power of choice, and you only alternate\'a0/ Between futile speculation and unconsidered action." (T. S. Eliot, *The Rock*).}