{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## Is virtue knowledge objectively valuable? \
\
The strength of this picture of practical reason is what some will consider a weakness. On this picture, practical reasoning is not just a procedural process, but a substantive one. That is, we do not reason about means solely, but also about ends. Indeed, on this picture, practical reasoning is defined as an orientation to practice in pursuit of apparent goods and in avoidance of apparent evils. As Aquinas says, "This is the first precept of [practical reason], that 'good is to be done and pursued, and evil is to be avoided.'^[@aquinas, IIa. Q.94. Art. 2.]\
\
He further says:\
\
>Now as "being" is the first thing that falls under the apprehension simply, so "good" is the first thing that falls under the apprehension of the practical reason, which is directed to action: since every agent acts for an end under the aspect of good. Consequently the first principle of practical reason is one founded on the notion of good, viz. that "good is that which all things seek after." Hence this is the first precept of law, that "good is to be done and pursued, and evil is to be avoided."[@aquinas IIa. Q.94. Art. 2]\
\
\
### practical reason is motivation\
\
I argued that practical reasons can, by themselves, be motives. But we I will go further: practical reasons are the *primary* meaning of the term 'motive'. Other psychological states such as hungers, thirsts, loves, fears, *move* me to action the same way that such states move non-rational organisms. For rational animals, only reasons *motivate* me to act, since motivation is (I argue) a fundamentally rational state. \
\
\
### practical reason is end-goal activity\
\
Foot is persuaded that we must assume a definition of practical reasoning that is substantive, rather than merely procedural. Practical reasoning does not just aim at means to ends, nor does it merely aim at "ends"; it aims at *the apparent good*. \
\
>This now seems to me to be the correct way of meeting the challenge that I myself issued in \'91Morality as a System of Hypothetical Imperatives\'92 and at that time despaired of meeting: namely, to show the rationality of acting, even against desire and self\uc0\u8208 interest, on a demand of morality. The argument depends on the change of direction that Quinn suggested: seeing goodness as setting a necessary condition of practical rationality and therefore as at least a part\u8208 determinant of the thing itself. Nor is this a quite unfamiliar way of arguing. Many of us are willing to reject a \'91present desire\'92 theory of reasons for action because we think that someone who knowingly puts his future health at risk for a trivial pleasure is behaving foolishly, and therefore not well. Seeing his will as defective, we therefore say that he is doing what he has reason not to do. Being unable to fit the supposed \'91reason\'92 into some preconceived present\u8208 desire\u8208 based theory of reasons for action, we do not query whether it really is a foolish way to behave, but rather hang on to the evaluation and shape our theory of reasons accordingly. And it is exactly a generalization of this presumption about the direction of the argument on which I am now insisting. For what, we may ask, is so special about prudence that it alone among the virtues should be reasonably thought to relate to practical rationality in such a way? [@foot2001natural 63]\
\
If goodness is a "necessary condition of practical rationality" then we are already committed to a substantive view of practical reason, rather than a merely procedural neo-Humean view. \
\
One of the best reasons to think practical reason is end-oriented and substantive rather than merely procedural is that practical reason is important. \
\
Foot identifies an argument for the importance of practical rationality on the basis that *we cannot help but value it*. Foot follows Quinn's lead in criticising a view of reason that makes the goal "the maximal satisfaction of an agent's desires and preferences, suitably corrected for the effects of misinformation, wishful thinking, and the like."[@quinn1992rationality] The trouble, Foot says, is that we *cannot consistently believe this view.*\
\
>He pointed out that by this account, practical reason, which would concern only the relation of means to ends, would therefore be indifferent to nastiness or even disgracefulness in an agent's purposes. And Quinn asked, in the crucial sentence of the article, *what then would be so important about practical rationality?* In effect he is pointing to our taken\uc0\u8208 for\u8208 granted, barely noticed assumption that practical rationality has the status of a kind of master virtue, in order to show that we cannot in consistency with ourselves think that the Humean account of it is true.[@foot2001natural 62]\
\
\
>I argue that Aquinas provides an account of the teleology of practical reasoning according to which its starting points are basic human goods, which the human will is naturally inclined to seek. In this way, Aquinas thinks that all practical reasoning is ultimately reasoning for the sake of attaining or maintaining these ends. Consequently, all practical reasoning is ultimately for the sake of living the sort of life that pertains to man. Indeed for Aquinas, there could be no practical teleology without natural teleology, since there would be nothing to reason towards if the will were not by nature inclined towards the exemplification of human form.[@frey 66]}