{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ### One kind of reason: practical reasons\
\
What is required is a step back to examine the natural of practical reasons themselves and how they relate to practical reasoning in general. I would like to argue that there is one genus of reasons for action: practical reasons. There are many species of practical reason, but proper distinction is not between "moral" and "non-moral" but between various kinds of moral reasons. \
\
MacIntyre's earliest ethical work distinguished the significance of moral judgments compared to other kinds of judgments. In a careful critique of both intuitionists such as Moore and emotivists such as Stevenson, MacIntyre concluded that both (mistakenly) assume that moral judgments and moral terms have significance only in their referential meaning. The intuitionists, of course, concluded that moral terms refer to a non-natural property, while the emotivists concluded that moral terms do not refer to such a property and so do not refer at all. (Naturalists, later in the 20th century, argue that moral terms refer to natural properties.) MacIntyre\'92s alternative denies the assumption entirely; moral judgments \'93have their own kind of logic\'94 and their significance, like other kinds of judgments, comes from \'93exhibiting the logic of their usage.\'94[@murphy2003macintyre 118, quoting p. 73 of MacIntyre\'92s master\'92s thesis *The Significance of Moral Judgments*] The significance of moral judgments is that \'93they enable us to solve problems of appraisal and of action.\'94 Solving problems of evaluation (we might say) and action is their place in \'93a pattern of language and action\'85\'94 He continues: \
\
>Above all they arise out of the way in which we see the world and the way in which our language allows us to see the world. We cannot sufficiently emphasize the direction given to our appraisals by the language which happens to be available for our descriptions. It is as we see the facts that we judge the world.\
\
MacIntyre\'92s point is that moral judgments are not *simply* useful in moral dilemmas or quandaries. They appear, at the earliest stages of childhood development, in a pattern of usage that is inextricable from the human activities of reasoning, acting, and appraising. Evaluative judgments appear in the widest imaginable spread of human activities, from politics to playgrounds, from sociology to social life, from the practices of law and medicine to the professions of journalism and psychology, from the sciences to the arts. Even if this point be granted, moral dilemmas are not *unreal*. Moral dilemmas are a special version of our general \'93problems of appraisal and action.\'94 They may be particularly vexing, but they are no different from the general problems of how to live, how to be happy, what kinds of public policies to pursue, what apparently meaningful types of life are really meaningful. \
\
### History of error\
\
To make this case, it is helpful to examine how historically we came to make the familiar, but faulty, distinction between moral and non-moral reasons.\
\
Foot cites Mill as an early proponent of the distinction: \
\
>J. S. Mill, for instance, expresses this modern point of view quite explicitly, saying in his essay *On Liberty* that \'91A person who shows rashness, obstinacy, self\uc0\u8208 conceit .\'a0.\'a0. who cannot restrain himself from harmful indulgences\'92 shows faults (Mill calls them \'91self\u8208 regarding faults\'92) which \'91are not properly immoralities\'92 and while they \'91may be proofs of any amount of folly .\'a0.\'a0. are only a subject of moral reprobation when they involve a breach of duty to others, for whose sake the individual is bound to have care for himself\'92.[@foot2001natural 68]\
\
Mill distinguishes folly from immorality, where folly is failure to provide goods for oneself. MacIntyre further summarizes the conceptual roots of the terms 'moral' and 'ethical'.\
\
>'Moral\'92 is the etymological descendant of \'91moralis\'92. But \'91moralis\'92, like its Greek predecessor *ethikos* --  Cicero invented \'91moralis\'92 to translate the Greek word in the *De Fato* -- means \'91pertaining to character\'92 where a man\'92s character is nothing other than his set dispositions to behave systematically in one way rather than another, to lead on particular kind of life... The early uses of 'moral' did not contrast with \'93\'91prudential\'92 or \'91self interested\'92\'94 nor with \'93\'91legal or \'91religious\'92... The word to which it is closest in meaning is perhaps most simply \'91practical\'92.\'94[@macintyre1984after 38] \
\
This conceptual history illuminates that moral and non-moral reasons each exemplify, in their own ways, a broader conceptual structure of practicality. We identify *reasons to act*. \
\
This point is not merely of historical or etymological interest (though of course, the narrow sense of the word 'moral' in discourse today is clear enough). The point is that  qualities such as benevolence and generosity we tend to call human \'93moral goodness\'94 are of a type with a *broader category of goodness*.  Foot explains: \'93I want to show that judgments usually considered to be the special subject of moral philosophy should really be seen as belonging to a wider class of evaluations of conduct with which they share a common conceptual structure.\'94 [@foot2001natural 66-67] \
\
In the story of the word 'moral' we can trace the history of the concept of practical reason. The domain of practicality is two fold: it is the domain of *practical reasons* (facts in the world calling for action) which are identified by the *practical reason* (of an agent). \
\
That domain was subdivided into narrower fields: First, it meant a particular way of life, habit, or character. Then, it meant 'maxim', a practical lesson, like the \'93moral of the story\'94, the point, that to be acted on, the rule. Third, it came to mean a domain of rules of conduct that are \'93neither theological nor legal nor aesthetic.\'94[@macintyre1984after 39] Finally, in the 1700s, it meant a particular kind of conduct, especially sexual conduct. \
\
The distinction between moral and non-moral *reasons* shows up in a similar distinction between two different kinds of 'ought' or 'should'. Elizabeth Anscombe had observed in 1958 that a similar distinction (between moral and non-moral) runs betweeen two senses of 'ought': \
\
>The terms \'93should\'94 or \'93ought\'94 or \'93needs\'94 relate to good and bad: e.g. machinery needs oil, or should or ought to be oiled, in that running without oil is bad for it, or it runs badly without oil. According to this conception, of course, "should" and "ought" are not used in a special "moral" sense when one says that a man should not bilk. (In Aristotle's sense of the term "moral" [\uc0\u942 \u952 \u953 \u954 \u972 \u962 ], they are being used in connection with a moral subject\u8209 matter: namely that of human passions and [non\u8209 technical] actions.) But they have now acquired a special so\u8209 called "moral" sense-\u8209 i.e. a sense in which they imply some absolute verdict (like one of guilty/not guilty on a man) on what is described in the "ought" sentences used in certain types of context: not merely the contexts that Aristotle would call "moral"\u8209 -passions and actions\u8209 -but also some of the contexts that he would call "intellectual.\'94[@anscombe1958]\
\
The peculiarly *moral* 'ought' means, for some, a final, verdictive ought -- like the kind of "thou shalt" language used in the Ten Commandments. But *this* kind of ought, Anscombe thinks, only makes sense in the mouth of a believer in divine law. I should prefer rather to reserve the final, verdictive ought for what Foot (following Davidson) calls what someone should do "all things considered."[@foot2001natural 57]\
\
What would happen if we re-opened our focus and looked at practical reasons as a whole? That is exactly what the broader "Character ethics" conception of practical reasons does. Julia Annas\'92 presentation of virtue as as a skill illuminates this same point, I think, beautifully. She says, "I should develop an account of virtue in which I show have central to the idea that the practical reasoning of the virtuous person is analogous in important ways\'85 to the practical reasoning of someone who's exercising a practical skill.\'94[@annas2011intelligent 3] What she calls the \'93skill analogy\'94 might be taken as problematic since it drains the peculiarly *moral* quality out of virtue. The opposite is true: The skill analogy fills the project of living daily life with the potential for virtue. The virtuous person is *good at* and not just *good* \'97 good at helping others, good at thinking ahead, good at human life. The vicious person, by contrast, is not just bad but *bad at* the essential elements of human life. Of course, being born with a paucity of natural talents is not a matter of immorality or is being born with an abundance of natural talents a matter of moral worth. Rather, the admirable person makes *good use* of his or her fortune, and the despicable person makes bad use of it. The admirable person is all the more admirable when he or she proves skillful of making good use even of very bad fortune; and the miserable person is all the more pitiable when he or she wastes even of very good fortune. \
\
That is not to say that practical reason does not include the domain of "concern for others". It is only to argue that other-regarding qualities such as benevolence and generosity (which are easily thought of under the description human \'93moral goodness\'94) are *of a type* with a broader category of goodness.  She says: "judgments usually considered to be the special subject of moral philosophy should really be seen as belonging to a wider class of evaluations of conduct with which they share a common conceptual structure.\'94 [@foot2001natural 66-67] \
\
That said, concern for others is what I call \'932nd-personal morality\'94. That is, my duties to you and to others. This would include obligations, values, and virtues as well as broader social or political ones. I suggest that the dominant virtue here is not only justice but love \'97 I.e., a strong regard for the other, a charitable orientation to promoting the good of others, refusing to harm them, and committing to protect them from harm.  But the rest of the practical domain I call 1st-personal and 3rd-personal. The entire set is the domain of practicality \'97 what one ought to do or ought to think, say, etc. The three sub-domains are defined by the object with regard to which one ought to do and not do this or that. \
\
The domain of 1st-person morality is proper respect and care for one\'92s self \'97 self-love or enlightened self-interest. This is what Mill called the domain of \'93prudence\'94. It includes the virtues that benefit both oneself and others (moderation and courage) but especially practical wisdom, without which none of the other virtues do me much good. \
\
The domain of 3rd-person morality is proper respect and care for everything that is not you or me \'97 animals and plants, pets and work animals, our possessions, our earth and environment, and perhaps even our solar system. The primary virtue of this domain is justice, a respect for the whole and the proper arrangement of all the parts.^[If God exists, then 3rd-personal morality would require piety to him or her, since on most theisms God is not strictly speaking \'93one of us\'94 but still demands our allegiance, sacrifice, or what have you.]\
\
\
### May need to move\
\
This is basically the view of Aristotle and the neo-Aristotelians. Jack Weinstein says: \'91The term practical rationality is derived from Aristotle\'92s *phronesis*. It is to be distinguished from *sophia*, a more technical form of reasoning. Practical rationality leads to more approximate conclusions; it takes context and relative facts into account, and it usually leads to moral or political conclusions.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 60-61] If we take philosophical ethics to be reflection on morality as a whole then, on this view, philosophical ethics is reflection on practical rationality. Or, in Gibbard\'92s unforgettable phrasing, it is \'93thinking how to live\'94.[@gibbard2009thinking] \
\
\
Considering practical reason as a whole in this way helps us to understand Aristotle and the neo-Aristotelians. Jack Weinstein says: \'91The term practical rationality is derived from Aristotle\'92s *phronesis*. It is to be distinguished from *sophia*, a more technical form of reasoning. Practical rationality leads to more approximate conclusions; it takes context and relative facts into account, and it usually leads to moral or political conclusions.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 60-61] If we take philosophical ethics to be reflection on morality as a whole then, on this view, philosophical ethics is reflection on practical rationality. Practical rationality is simply the process of deciding what to do. It is the process of thinking through what to do. Or, in Gibbard\'92s unforgettable phrasing, it is \'93thinking how to live\'94.[@gibbard2009thinking] \
\
The argument is simple: We act on reasons. We pursue what is good, or what seems good. There are various types of good; hence there are various types of reasons. But we do not act *only* on one type of reason  (moral reasons). Rather, we weigh and balance *all* the salient reasons we are aware of at the time when we deliberate and make decisions. In making a business transaction, the entrepreneur may allow considerations of justice to outweigh considerations of profit; or, he may allow considerations about loyalty to a friend outweighs considerations of justice. These two paths are not, respectively, \'93the moral\'94 path and the immoral path. They are both moral. They are both practical. Each path requires the agent to consider all salient reasons, weigh them, and fit them all together into a coherent plan to act this way rather than that, all things considered.\
\
So I conclude that the domain of morality is, if anything at all, the sub-domain of practical reason concerned with obligations, duties, rights, goods, and harms that might obtain between one member of society to another. This way of putting the classification clearly connects \'93morality\'94 with politics, family life, education, and so on. However, it paints in bright and burning colors the distinction between morality as a part of practical reason and practice itself. We are, first, and foremost, practical creatures, not merely moral or moralizing ones.}