{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
## Subjectivism about practical reason\
\
One item on the list of "more to be said" includes addressing the practical reason subjectivist who would argue that the Frey's "practical order" is not really an order "out there" in the world but an order "in here" in the human minds and human  psychology.  This is the problem of the status of practical reasons within (a broadly-construed) naturalism. \
\
As Simon Blackburn summarizes, naturalism asks:\
\
>... No more of the world than we already know is there\'97the ordinary features of things on the basis of which we make decisions about them, like or dislike them, fear them and avoid them, desire them and seek them out. It asks no more than this: a natural world, and patterns of reaction to it.[@blackburn1985spreading] \
\
\
Consider an example: When I take it as a reason to buy my friend lunch because he just lost his job, how are we to understand the proposition "My friend just lost his job"? It is clearly descriptive fact or state of affairs, but it also seems to become something else when I take it as a reason for buying him lunch.   \
\
\
\
\
Subjectivism broadly construed comes in a variety of forms: non-cognitivist subjectivism, cognitivist subjectivism, constructivism, and so on. One currently popular approach is expressivism: \
\
>Expressivism in this form suggests a naturalistic interpretation of practical reason, one that may seem appropriate to the enlightened commitments of the modern scientific world view. It is naturalistic metaphysically, insofar as it makes no commitment to the objective existence in the world of such allegedly questionable entities as values, norms, or reasons for action.[@seppracticalreason]\
\
What each of these quite disparate views share in common is a denial of robust realism. Jay Wallace explains such realism as follows: \
\
>The basic commitment of realism in this domain is the idea that there are facts of the matter about what we have reason to do that are prior to and independent of our deliberations, to which those deliberations are ultimately answerable. Realists picture practical reason as a capacity for reflection about an objective body of normative truths regarding action (Parfit 2011, Scanlon 2014).[@seppracticalreason, section 2]\
\
One of the best reasons to be realists about practical reason as an end-oriented and substantive activity is that practical reason is *important.* Foot identifies an argument for the importance of practical rationality on the basis that *we cannot help but value it*. Foot follows Quinn's lead in criticizing a view of reason that makes the goal "the maximal satisfaction of an agent's desires and preferences, suitably corrected for the effects of misinformation, wishful thinking, and the like."[@quinn1992rationality] The trouble, Foot says, is that we *cannot consistently believe this view.*\
\
>He pointed out that by this account, practical reason, which would concern only the relation of means to ends, would therefore be indifferent to nastiness or even disgracefulness in an agent's purposes. And Quinn asked, in the crucial sentence of the article, *what then would be so important about practical rationality?* In effect he is pointing to our taken\uc0\u8208 for\u8208 granted, barely noticed assumption that practical rationality has the status of a kind of master virtue, in order to show that we cannot in consistency with ourselves think that the Humean account of it is true.[@foot2001natural 62]\
\
Relatedly, David Enoch's recent volume *Taking Morality Seriously* builds a case for moral realism on the basis that moral realism is the best explanation for the moral earnestness which most of us *cannot but help feel*.[@enoch2011taking] \
\
### Subjective values\
\
For Nagel, subjectivism would then include the straightforward projectivism of Mackie for whom moral values seem objective only because we "project" our deepest feelings and valuings onto the world but also the subtle social constructivism of McDowell for whom the moral law is real only because we legislate it, binding because we bind ourselves to it. \
\
John Mackie\'92s classic essay argues that \'93there are no objective values\'94 (13).[All page citations in this paper refer to Mackie's essay "The Subjectivity of Values" in Shafer-Landau and Cuneo (eds). *Foundations of Ethics: An Anthology.* Blackwell, 2007. The original essay appears in @mackie.] Mackie admits that "the main tradition of European moral philosophy\'94 accepts objective moral values. He admits that moral thought and language assumes it: the notion of objective value has  \'93a firm basis in ordinary thought, and even in the meanings of moral terms\'94 (16). Appearances suggest that values are indeed part of the \'93fabric of the world\'94; that they are categorically obligating and motivating; and that being a moral person in part is constituted by the recognition and proper response to such values. \
\
He admits that the objectivity of (some) moral values is, in short, a \'93defeasible presumption.\'94 In spite of all this, Mackie thinks it is possible and needful to debunk objective morality and to show that values are subjective. \
\
His two arguments aim to bear the burden of proof on subjectivism. Values like goodness, rightness, wrongness, and also beauty or ugliness are \'93not part of the fabric of the world\'94 (13). This claim has two parts. The ontological part is that objective values simply do not exist. Put differently, there is no "categorically imperative element\'94 to moral oughts (15). There are no entities in the world such that I ought to do X or not do Y regardless of my desires, contingent wants and needs. \
\
The argument from relativity or disagreement is this: moral codes vary between societies at a time and within a society across time. (For example, one society endorses polygamy, another condemns it; one society endorses human sacrifice, another condemns it; one endorses revenge killing, another condemns it.) An explanation of the wide variation and instability of these endorsements and condemnations, as well as the accompanying attitudes of approval, disgust, honor, is that there are no objective values at work. The moral code of a society is not a map of what is \'93really\'94 morally lawful, but a map of that societies attitudes, endorsements, and condemnations. I will summarize Mackie\'92s own discussion of the argument from relativity below. \
\
Mackie provides one reply to the argument from relativity or disagreement: Perhaps varying moral codes \'93express perceptions, most of them seriously inadequate and badly distorted, of objective values\'94 (18). People and societies vary on evaluative matters in the same way and for the same reason that people and societies vary on scientific, historical, legal, and other matters. Perhaps the disagreements between people and societies \'97 the varieties of moral codes \'97 are similar to scientific or historical disagreements. Scientific disagreements arise between people offering different \'93speculative inferences or explanatory hypotheses based on inadequate evidence\'94 (18). I think Mackie is suggesting that two people might dispute a particular point (is Pluto a planet?) because neither of them has fully accurate knowledge and both are doing the best they can with the available evidence, though future evidence may be forthcoming. \
\
But the Distorted Moral Perception reply is, Mackie thinks, false. He denies that objective values are the kinds of entities about which more evidence may be forthcoming. The analogy to scientific or historical disagreements, then, does not hold. \
\
Mackie is seriously misguided here. The argument from disagreement has been so often deployed and so widely misunderstood it is hard to know where to start.[@enoch2009moral. Enoch summarizes no less than ten possible interpretations of the inference from disagreement to moral anti-realism. Most of them are non-sequitors, some beg the question against realism, and some offer real challenges that can and have been met.] There are two possible challenges, and I think both are justified.[@sepmoralantirealism] The first is to deny that disagreement is so widespread as to be a massive problem for moral realism. The second is that even if there *were* widespread variation in moral codes between people and societies, that we should not necessarily take that as reason to be skeptical about moral values. \
\
Let's take each of these challenges in turn. First, moral disagreement is not good reason to be skeptical about the objectivity moral values because such disagreement is saliently identical to scientific and philosophical disagreement; and scientific and philosophical disagreements are not good reason to be skeptical about scientific and philosophical realities. Therefore moral disagreement is not a good reason to be skeptical about moral realities. Let's call this the Scientific/Philosophical Disagreement Reply. \
\
Mackie's reply is that scientific disputes are the result of speculation and (unlike moral ones) are subject to further empirical evidence. But this is not always true. Some scientific disputes will probably never be resolved with reference to new empirical data: what happened seconds before the Big Bang? What is the necessary and sufficient condition for a discipline to be considered a science? \
\
The case of philosophical disagreement is even more clear. Some philosophical disputes certainly will never be resolved by adequate empirical evidence: Is idealism or empiricism or platonism true, or something else? The persistance of adherents to all three schools of thought for the last 2000 years (at least) shows that such disputes are ongoing and not likely to be resolved. The dilemma is that if ideological disagreement is evidence that there is no fact of the matter \'97 no objective truth \'97 then perhaps Mackie can use moral disagreement as evidence that there is no objective value. But if he allows, say, that platonism is false and empiricism true (despite the enduring existence of platonists), then he has to allow that (say) societies that endorse slavery are morally mistaken while those who reject it are accurately assessing the relevant objective values. \
\
A further buttress to this reply is that moral disagreement is evidence that some values are objective. People don't argue over what is truly subjective and known to be so ("I feel sick." "No, you feel don't, you feel quite well!").^[I borrow this cheeky example from Peter Kreeft. Cf. @kreeft2012 Question 7, Article 1] People only argue over what is objective and difficult to answer (like is the center of the earth liquid or solid?)\
\
Second, moral disagreement is not as widespread as often assumed, Mackie himself offers an objection to the argument from relativity: perhaps some very broad moral principles *are* universally recognized. For example, isn't it universally recognized that (say) it is good to promote the general happiness? Perhaps these broad moral principles are agreed upon in a way that renders moral disagreement less puzzling and the existence of objective values more plausible. Call this the Moral Agreement reply. \
\
I think the Moral Agreement reply is a serious problem for the would-be subjectivist. But Mackie\'92s reasons for rejecting it are puzzling. First, he complains that arguing that broad, elevated moral principles are objective entails that specific, practical moral principles are contingent. He says, \'93if things had been otherwise, quite different sorts of actions would have been right\'94 (19). What is the substance of this reply? It is eminently true that \'93if things had been otherwise, quite different sorts of actions would have been right\'94 \'97 if for instance humans could breath underwater, then waterboarding would not be wrong because it would not be torturous and therefore cruel. If Bob\'92s society was communist then amassing capital for his own personal use would be selfish and illegal and therefore antisocial. These counterfactuals are just what we would predict if general moral principles reflected universal, objective values. \
\
Second, Mackie suggests that most people\'92s moral lives and moral judgments do not actually operate by specifying \'93general principles.\'94 Rather, people seem to make moral judgments and live their moral lives according to certain \'93immediate responses\'94 and \'93basic moral judgments\'94. \
\
Thankfully, Mackie does not spend too much time elaborating on this paper thin reply and moves on to the argument from queerness. We can concede the point. It is true that we make immediate responses more often than thoughtful moral judgments. What is that supposed to prove? For example, perhaps we hear a news story about a woman beating, scalding, suffocating, and finally murdering her children before storing their corpses in a freezer.[^3] That immediately strikes us as cruel, sick, degraded, disgusting, and wrong. Whether this response is the logical extension of a moral principle I reflectively endorse (such as \'93parents should care for their children\'94) or merely a pre-reflectively, visceral attitude is irrelevant to whether the moral judgment accurately reflects the objective value of parental love. \
\
A third point that makes the Moral Agreement Reply even stronger:  Some moral codes (both general and specific) are well-nigh universal. For instance, the universal prohibition on incestuous relationships, the universal censure on immoderation (drunkenness or alcoholism are condemned in every society in the world), the universal approbation of justice and compassion, specifically caring for the poor, the abandoned, the orphans, and many more.[@lewisabolition, "Appendix I: Illustrations of the Tao." Lewis, a literary scholar, compiles a list of agreeing moral codes from a variety of ancient, medieval, and modern codes.] These moral laws are not general but rather specific; they are not parochial but appear in dramatically different cultures at all known historical periods. The best explanation for such widespread, profound moral agreement is that all parties are apprised of the same objective values.\
\
\
Mackie's epistemological thesis is that, even if objective values did exist, our epistemic access to them would require the existence of a *sui generis* mysterious faculty of moral perception. Since no such faculty exists, we are justified in rejection the existence of objective values.  Furthermore, disagreement about objective value and "queerness" of putatively objective values renders their existence less likely. It is more likely that *we* "objectify" our valuings onto the world by our thought and language. Hence, right and wrong are invented. \
\
The famed argument from queerness Mackie calls \'93even more important\'85 and certainly more generally applicable\'94 than the argument from disagreement. I do not think it fares any better.  \
\
The argument from queerness builds on the sense that \'93if there were objective values, then they would be entities or qualities or relations of a very strange sort, utterly different from anything else in the universe\'94 (19). Objective values would be esoterica, akin to non-natural qualities, Plato\'92s transcendent Form of Good. They would be (like divine commands from heaven)  authoritatively prescriptive yet empirically unverifiable. (Mackie is as poetic as possible in making the descriptive seem mundane and the prescriptive seem mystical.) What\'92s more, their power of categorical commendation, of obligating us to act in certain ways irrespective of our desires, is utterly unique. The reasoning seems to be that we assume the world is a unified whole, and we know a lot about spatio-temporal, physical entities, include evolved animals like ourselves who are language-users, concept-users, and evaluators. We know that we are motivated by our desires, preferences, by the pursuit of pleasure and avoidance of pain. So it seems more reasonable "To ask no more of the world than we already know is there\'97the ordinary features of things on the basis of which we make decisions about them, like or dislike them, fear them and avoid them, desire them and seek them out. It asks no more than this: a natural world, and patterns of reaction to it."[@blackburn1985spreading] It does not seem necessary to posit abstract, non-physical entities that have no intrinsic relation to our other psychological states such as our desires and approvals. \
\
The first reply to the argument from queerness that Mackie considers is this: perhaps objective values are not so strange (in that they are like essences, numbers, substances, necessity and possibility, causation, etc.) even though they are *are* unlike descriptive facts. (Call this the Partners in Crime reply.)\
\
But Mackie thinks the Partners in Crime reply would be ultimately impotent if we could show that we can \'93on empiricist foundations\'85we construct an account of the ideas and beliefs and knowledge that we have of all these matters\'94 (19). He does not try here to construct such an account. But even if an empiricist foundation could *not* be given, he doubles down: that failure would tell *against* the existence of essences, numbers, and so on.\
\
The success of the objection that objective values are not saliently different from other unobjectionable abstract entities or concepts like necessity or causation depends on the details. Russ Shafer-Landau[@shafer2003moralrealism], Terence Cuneo[@cuneo2007], David Enoch[@enoch2011taking] have each recently provided these details and shown (though I shall not try to show it here) that indeed objective values are not any more objectionable than other kinds of abstract objects. For example, Cuneo argues that whatever \'93objectionable features\'94 moral norms display are also displayed *inter alia* by epistemic norms. If Mackie is an \'91epistemic skeptic\'92 then he must deny the intrinsic, categorical, reason-giving force of such epistemic value judgments as *you ought to believe whatever proposition is supported by the best evidence.* But to deny such epistemic reasons is absurd. \
\
The epistemological part of the argument from queerness is that objective values, if they existed, would be known through an utterly unique and correspondingly queer faculty (19). He doesn\'92t just mean they would be unverifiable empirically (that too). He means that it is difficult to imagine how something like Plato\'92s Form of the Good could be such that \'93knowledge of it provides the knower with both a direction and an overriding motive; something\'92s being good both tells the person who knows this to pursue it and makes him pursue it\'85 the end has to-be-pursuedness somehow built into it\'94 (20). But, Mackie thinks, Hume has successfully argued that reasons (instances of knowing that p) cannot be \'93reasons\'94 (instances of motivating to act). The notion that values and disvalues intrinsically influence the will to pursue and avoid them postulates \'93value-features of quite a different order from anything else with which we are acquainted, and of a corresponding faculty with which to detect them\'94 (20). \
\
To further underscore the weirdness of objective value, Mackie poses the question of how we are to suppose moral qualities relate to natural facts. Even if we argue that the moral quality of wrongness \'93supervenes\'94 on or \'93is entailed by\'94 the natural facts (say, on the fact that the children are lighting the cat on fire), we deserve an account of the alleged supervenient or entailed quality. More likely than that we are able to \'93just see\'94 the \'93wrongness\'94 in the natural state of affairs, it seems more likely to Mackie that we are recognizing ordinary qualities such as that the action is socially condemned, and that we disprove. \
\
The argument from queerness does not tell much \'97 if at all \'97 against the existence of objective moral standards. Mackie\'92s argument has been called, and rightly so, an fallacy of the appeal to personal incredulity. The argument from personal incredulity has something of the form of \'93If on my assumptions or background beliefs p is hard for me to believe, then p is false.\'94\
\
Christine Korsgaard offers a different substantive reply to the argument from queerness. She concedes that categorically-obligating entities are *different* from other entities, but denies the suggestion that they therefore do not exist. She says: \'93It's true that they are queer sorts of entities and that knowing them isn't like anything else. But that doesn't mean that they don't exist.... For it is the most familiar fact of human life that the world contains entities that can tell us what to do and make us do it. They are people, and the other animals.\'94[@korsgaard1996sources 166.] This reply seems to me right. \
\
Finally, Mark Timmons has clarified one part of Mackie\'92s argument to be the worry that the supervenience of moral properties on non-moral properties (such as biological or psychological ones) is somehow mysterious.[@timmons1999morality] In response, Russ Shafer-Landau has offered compelling arguments that such supervenience is no more or less objectionable than the supervenience of higher-order natural properties (like life) on lower-order natural properties (like certain cellular or molecular structures).[@shafer2003moralrealism, chapter 4.]  (Shafer-Landau also critiques the Humean theory of psychology that underlies part of Mackie\'92s worry about queerness.^[@shafer2003moralrealism, chapter 5.])\
\
In short, though the argument from queerness raises interesting and important questions, these questions do not amount to objections to the existence of objective value but rather they are invitations to investigate questions in metaphysics, psychology, and epistemology surrounding objective value. \
\
### Response\
\
The case for the objectivity of practical reason is one Nagel has been polishing for decades. It begins by observing that moral realism is our default view. Pre-reflectively, most of us have no objection to the seeming fact that some reasons for acting are good reasons, and others bad. Some primary normative facts, such as that is wrong torture animals have a very strong, "quasi-analytic" force to them. If moral realism is a "defeasible presumption"[@nagel1989view 143] then the burden of proof lies with its opponents. \
\
According to Nagel, subjectivism derives what plausibility it has from two contentions, neither of which is enough to render it more plausible than realism: first, subjectivists contend that value judgments with objective purport are *really* just masks for subjective psychological states. Nagel concedes that some \'93pockets of... subjectivity\'94 seem objective but can be "unmasked", such as grammar and etiquette.[@nagel1989view 155] However, we cannot justifiably explain these unmaskings by assuming that *all* seemingly objective judgments are *really* subjective. Instead, such unmaskings ought to be accommodated within an overall view of objectivity.  \
\
Second, subjectivists observe that our motives, attitudes, desires, approvals, and rationalizations are all simply features of our psychology. Nagel concedes that the psychological states are the *starting* point of practical reasoning. However, it is always in order to ask (a variation of Moore's Open Question): *Ought I be motivated by these psychological states?* Ethics begins with psychological states but then subjects these states "to examination, codification, questioning, criticism, and so on."\
\
While Nagel allows that he has not *refuted* skepticism, nevertheless, the defeasible presumption of moral objectivity has not been dislodged. In a closing diatribe I find persuasive, he says:\
\
>I remain convinced that pain is really bad, and not just something we hate, and that pleasure is really good, and not just something we like. That is just how they glaringly seem to me, however hard I try to imagine the contrary, and I suspect the same is true of most people... the scientific credentials of Darwinism... are not enough to dislodge the immediate conviction that objectivity is not an illusion with respect to basic judgments of value.[@nagel2012mind 110]\
\
\
### Another point about disagreement\
\
The question of how to live, and of how to resolve pressing moral disputes and dramatic moral conundrums, is not easy. There are various answers. People disagree.\
\
Anyone who has long engaged in dialectical disputes over the various answer to the normative question of how to live well eventually comes to ask a secondary question: is there even any truth to be found? Are there any \'91right answers\'92 in ethics? Is there anything to all this discussion besides gas? Some worry that ethics has no \'91right answers\'92 because it is all just intuition-pumping. Some people view ethics as too easy because it is only a discussion of one\'92s opinion. \
\
We must admit that normative ethical conclusions \'97 whatever conclusions satisfy us at the end of a long philosophical discussion about what is good and right \'97 are different from conclusions in paleontology, medicine, or calculus. What does the difference amount to? Why is ethics *as a discipline* so different from, say, natural sciences? \
\
There are two sorts of interpretations of ethics as a discipline in light of the diversity of answers to the question about how to live well. The first is Hume\'92s answer, that ethics is \'93easy\'94 (while metaphysics, philosophy of mind, and philosophical anthropology are presumably difficult). \
\
The second is Aristotle\'92s, that ethics is *a different sort of science* because it has a *different subject matter* to which it must correspond. He says, \'93For a well schooled man is wanting searches for that degree of precision in each kind of study which the nature of the subject at hand admits: is obviously just as foolish to accept arguments of probability from a mathematician has to demand strict demonstrations from an orator.\'94 [@aristotle Book I.3]\
\
By the traditional classification, ethics is a form of philosophy. Russ Shafer-Landau persuasively argues this simple equation in defense of moral realism[@shafer2007foundations ethics] but the point has broader import. If ethics is *not* a species of philosophy, it is something else entirely. Perhaps it is a species of psychology, politics, or evolutionary anthrpology. Such a categorization assumes, at the outset, that power prevails over truth. But to concede that there are no right answers in ethics, that ethical philosophers have no hope of finding any ethical truth is to give up on ethics as a discipline. \
\
So suppose ethics is a species of philosophy. The indirect answer is another question: Are there \'91right answers\'92 in philosophy? Isn\'92t the relation of philosophy in general to ethics in particular the relation of genus to species? This is the relation Russ Shafer-Landau argues for.[@shafer2012ethics] So the fate of ethical claims or ethical theories hangs on the fate of philosophical claims and theories as a whole. If we are philosophical optimists at all \'97 if we are not total skeptics or nihilists \'97 then we can be ethical optimists. \
\
So what species of philosophy is ethics? If philosophy is its genus, what is its differentia? As I have been arguing, ethics is the discipline of practical reason. There are \'91right answers\'92 in ethics since there are right ways to live one\'92s life, there are wells to live well and ways to live poorly; things can go well or badly for us. One of the fundamental governing assumptions of this work is that there is no special domain of the moral. Value theory is a whole package. There is at bottom no intelligible distinction between morality and prudence. \
\
\
### Moral Awe\
\
Another solution to the problem of moral relativism. I call this phenomenon moral awe. Moral awe is the feeling that arises upon witnessing someone exhibiting heroic virtue. It is something beyond moral approval or admiration, which one may feel even for "small victories" such as, say, when a child decides (against all odds) to share a toy on their on volition. Moral approval is not, on the whole, a destabilizing emotion. One can experience moral approvals and disapprovals by the dozens throughout a day without being "shaken up." Moral awe leaves one feeling "shaken up". Watching a documentary about Mother Theresa's activities in Calcultta, how she held and touched and kissed young children who were so sick -- and so disgusting -- that not even nurses had touched them for months, may be deeply affecting. Witnessing a father bow before his wife and children in order to ask for their forgiveness may be deeply affecting. \
\
Moral awe can "break through" one's conventional beliefs. It can shock and amaze one, almost in spite of oneself. \
\
## Conclusion\
}