{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\i\b\fs24 \cf0 ##. Does practical reasoning make natural norms irrelevant \'97 since reflecting on natural norms makes them mere data in the rational reflective process, not determinate, binding norms. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Another problem is the "irrelevance objection" to neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism. Briefly, this objection states that "natural norms" specific to the human species may push us in a particular direction but that they cannot justify an action as moral because ethical reflection allows us to step back from such natural norms and decide against them. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ##. Is practical reason naturalistic? Yes, on an unrestricted conception of how to live. 
\b0 Or are reasons only "in here" in us, psychological and rational, in which case humans are not natural? Or are reasons for acting "out there" in the world, not physical and not natural, in which case nature is normative? If so, is this naturalism? Is this view objective idealism? Is practical reason natural?\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i0 \cf0 \
Thus far, I have argued that practical reason aims at real practical reasons and goods "out there" in the world. Those goods are goods for humankind, goods for creatures like us, such as food, friendship, and knowledge. I have argued that virtues are "merely" human, but also argued that that human nature is normative; therefore, the proposition that virtues are normative is deduced from the major premise. There are still problems to be solved; specifically the relation between reason and nature. \
\
A remain problem is the relation between reason and nature. \
\
There are several aspects to this problem. For example, there seems to be a difference between what is known scientifically and what is known practically. A highly intractable but desirable goal would be to understand the process of practical reasoning in light of our animal nature and our place in the biological and physical order. The question is just how to do that. Is human nature just another example of a biological nature, like chimpanzees and dolphins, subject to evaluation by the same patterns of normativity? Since humanity is something quite different, on account of our rational self-awareness and practical agency, have we left naturalism behind?\
\
The two sorts are what I have called Organic Naturalism and Practical Naturalism. (Julia Annas draws the same distinction in terms of biological and rational.) As we have already seen, virtue ethicists tend to pick one or the other, or vacillate between one and the other, or try to bridge the apparent gap between them. Where they can agree is that somehow human nature, our nature as practical reasoning animals, must have normativity 'built-in' so to speak. When Christopher Toner, for example, draws out same distinction between the kinds of naturalism, he agrees with Hursthouse that the term 'Aristotelian naturalism' "implies that human nature is normative, such that to be morally good is to fulfill one's nature."[@toner2008sorts 221.] \
\
The question is just how to do that. Is human nature just another example of a biological nature, like chimpanzees and dolphins, subject to evaluation by the same patterns of normativity? Or is humanity something quite different, on account of our rational self-awareness and practical agency? If practical reasons are real in the world, and our capacity for identifying them is a fallible but reliable one, then is this view objective idealism? Is practical reason natural? To square this account of virtue as practical reasoning and rational practice with ethical naturalism requires a discussion of nature.}