{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## Toner's Criteria\
\
Christopher Toner provides at least the outline of a good answer. Chris Toner argues that the brands of naturalism espoused by Thompson, Hursthouse, and Foot -- the same sort I have defended above -- cannot adequately respond to a criticism McDowell (among others) have pressed. Toner presents four criteria that \'93naturalism must deliver if it is to support a revived Aristotelian virtue ethics\'85\'94[@toner2008sorts 222]  \
\
Natural norms must be intrinsically motivating (or practical), they must be intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of that nature (upon reflection, they seem binding, even if they do not mechanically determine one's action); they must be anchored in and express universal human nature; and first and second nature must be related in such a way that the second nature is an outgrowth of the first so that that in our given makeup is (first) natural which does tend toward an ethically mature second nature. \
\
Some of these we have already satisfied, but others remain. Let's review them in a bit more detail. \
\
1. Natural norms must be intrinsically able to motivate the bearer of the nature. \uc0\u8232 \
\
The "natural norm" must be intrinsically able to motivate: desires that *do* motivate us satisfy this requirement. However, unless there is some "supervising principle" that coordinates desires (suppressing some, elevating others) the desires themselves seem to lead us to a sub-moral life; and the addition of such a supervising principle makes the theory no longer naturalistic. \
\
\
2. Natural norms must be intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of the nature. \
\
The natural norm must be something that justifies itself, either to all rational agents as such or to all moral agents. The norm need not, Toner admits, automatically persuade a Callicles to repent of his wickedness. However, it must be able to motivate. \
\
>This is why I say \'91\'91intrinsically able to motivate or justify\'92\'92 rather than \'91\'91intrinsically motivating or justifying\'92\'92: the natural norm is such that it can motivate or convince persons, provided they are not in too dysfunctional a state. In the same way a rose is such as to be intrinsically able to convince us of its being red. Its failure actually to do so in my case because I am color-blind or jaundiced does not impugn this intrinsic ability. Natural norms can motivate and convince because they are neither \'91\'91mere facts\'92\'92 about the way a given species does go on nor \'91\'91brute desires\'92\'92 a given species happens to have as a result of its evolutionary history.[@toner2008sorts 235]\
\
Micah Lott calls this the "authority-of-nature challenge"^[In @lott2012moral 770]. "The challenge depends on an apparent gap between what naturally good for us qua human beings (=the normal) and what has a claim upon our reason (=the normative)." Natural norms are either "normal" (i.e., natural) or "normative" (i.e., binding, authoritative, etc.)\uc0\u8232 \
\
3. Natural norms must be anchored in and express universal human nature. \
\
This was the task of chapter 3. \
\
The fourth criterion is our aim. \
\
\
4. First and second nature must be related so that the second is a natural outgrowth of the first, and so that that in our given makeup is (first) natural which does tend toward an ethically mature second nature.}