{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 #### The human function
\b0 \
So what about human beings *qua* species? Forget my individual telos for a moment. When we examine the function of any old item of human life, say, a knife, we see that it cuts. \
>What is the purpose of cutting vegetables? To prepare them for cooking. Why prepare vegetables for cooking? So we can eat them. What is the purpose of eating? so we can go on living. The series could stop there, but one could continue on and ask what the purpose in living is. In that we confront an existential question. (Brown 31-32)\
He briefly considers just ending the series by repeating the last answer: we eat in order to keep living, and we live in order to keep living -- the end. He also considers that the question loses its species-indexed meaning at this point and becomes member-indexed -- what is *my* purpose.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Is there teleology in nature? Are some natural causes final causes? Are final causes natural?\'a0\

\b0 \
Brown distinguishes four kinds of teleology: two agent-centered kinds and two others. The first is intentional actions, the second artifacts. The third is formal teleology, the fourth functional.\'a0\
\
Number \'a0Type \'a0 Name \'a0 \'a0Definition Example\
1. 1.1 Intentional Doing something for a reason. Bob jumped to beat the world record.\
2. 1.2 Artefactual Making something for a reason. Bettie designed the bridge to withstand earthquakes. Jimmy made a knork for cutting and stabbing meat.\
\
3. 2.1 Formal A thing's structure or organization serving some purpose. A knee joint allows for both motion and static rest. A sharp tooth is sharp in order to be able to puncture, pin, and scratch.\'a0\
4. 2.2 Functional A thing's activity serves some purpose. A running animal can catch prey or flee from predeators in order to survive.\'a0}