{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
## Irrelevance revisited\
\
We have thematized the concepts of nature and science and defended an unrestricted conception of both. It remains to address the irrelevance and pollyanna objections. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Jennifer Frey summarizes the solution:\
\
>I argue that Aquinas provides an account of the teleology of practical reasoning according to which its starting points are basic human goods, which the human will is naturally inclined to seek. In this way, Aquinas thinks that all practical reasoning is ultimately reasoning for the sake of attaining or maintaining these ends. Consequently, all practical reasoning is ultimately for the sake of living the sort of life that pertains to man. Indeed for Aquinas, there could be no practical teleology without natural teleology, since there would be nothing to reason towards if the will were not by nature inclined towards the exemplification of human form.[@frey 66]\
\
The object of human practical reasoning is the human life form. We aim to become what we are. That is, we aim to become in actuality what we we already are potentially. \
\
My answer will be that this form of naturalism is more adequate to the scientific facts, and is non-dualistic in a desirable way. I call this neo-Stoic naturalism, or Recursive Naturalism, since it is recursive in two ways: first, the normativity of human rationality is both an *instance* of nature and is *about* nature, including about itself. Second, the object of practical reason is both to discover *the thing to do* and, recursively, to become more practically reasonable.   Practical reasoning, when successful, sifts between excellent and defective expressions of our life form and correctly judges the kind of person one ought to become.\
\
\
Even though McDowell is critical of Foot's biological or organic naturalism, he does not wish to fall into a dualism between biology and rationality. Rather, he believes that it is possible to "formulate a conception of reason that is, in one sense, naturalistic: a formed state of practical reason is one's second nature, not something that dictates to one's nature from outside."[@mcdowell1998two] \
\
Toner argues that MacIntyre's conception of reason achieves this goal better than McDowell 's does. McDowell shares with non-cognitivists an implicit nature/human dualism whereby human rationality (in the space of reasons) is entirely of a different order than organic and inorganic nature (in the realm of law). Toner says: "
\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
the virtues are seen as acquired traits that fit human beings for the exercise of practical rationality toward which their shared nature directs them (thereby rejecting McDowell\'92s sharp separation of first and second natures)."[toner2008sorts 243]
\fs24 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0  \
\
Since human beings are *animals* after all, with animal sensations and emotions and urges, the "sharp separation" between biology and rationality not only cuts humans apart from the rest of the cosmos, but cuts human beings down the middle. McDowell's concept of human nature is not that we are practical rational animals; his unwitting concept of human nature is we are *practical reasoners* full stop. This error infects his definition of virtue as well. He believes that all virtues pertain to practical reasoning (or "sensitivity") where I argued that some virtues pertaining to practical *reasoning* while others pertain to rational *practice.* This view is more adequate because, as Toner explains: \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa240\partightenfactor0

\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
>The acquisition of the virtues not only prevents emotions from interfering with practical reasoning but also, in McDowellian terms, \'91\'91opens our eyes\'92\'92 to new sorts of reasons for action, not visible to the immature, that make the good of others part of our good. So\'85 MacIntyre links first and second natures much more closely than does McDowell.[toner2008sorts 243]\
\
Frey continues:\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 >The starting points or first principles of practical reasons are the natural ends that are constitutive of human life.  Practical reason presupposes ends, and our most general ends are constitutive of our form of life, and so shared in common by all mature, sane members of the species.  Aquinas thinks that we have rational knowledge of these ends qua ends\'97we have a kind of natural-practical knowledge of them.  Such knowledge is natural because all human beings have a natural disposition to acquire this knowledge; such knowledge is practical because the knowledge is of the end qua end\'97we know these ends as objects to be realized, and not as facts.  This practical knowledge of our ends is compatible with the self-conscious and self-determined character of a power of reason because it is still necessary for the agent to order these ends, to determine the specific manner in which they will be attained, and by what means.  On this account, self-determination (and thus free choice) is in the space between the general ends and the particular manner in which we realize them.[@frey2014how 20-1]    \
\
\
We should not take the difficulty of discerning which 'natural' impulses and qualities are virtuous and rational as a weakness. \
\
It seems rather to me a strength. It allows for Hesiod's insight: "Vice in abundance is easy to get; / The road is smooth and begins beside you, / But the gods have put sweat between us and virtue."^[*Works and Days* 287-9, quoted in *Republic* II, 364c.]\
\
Many people are irrational. Many people are not virtuous. But that is just to say that many people are imperfectly human, and not just by bad luck or misfortune; they are imperfectly actuating the human life form by making bad choices, being ill-informed, being lazy, being greedy. \
\
Just as health leads to more health (a healthy organism can eat, digest, and exercise better than its sick counterpart), virtue leads to more virtue (a diligent person is liable to become patient), vice leads to more vice (a lazy person is liable to become impatient). We ought to take care, at the earliest ages, to ensure the zealous cultivation of virtues in ourselves and others.\
\
\
\
>I do not presume to have achieved anything in the neighborhood of a demonstration of MacIntyre\'92s, or even of a broadly MacIntyrean, naturalism. I have tried only to show what an Aristotelian naturalism, which takes human nature as normative (such that to be morally good is to perfect one\'92s nature), would need to say; and to show that, among the main forms of "updated" Aristotelian naturalism on offer, something along the lines articulated by MacIntyre comes closest to saying it. Although I have tried to anticipate and turn aside some important objections, whether the MacIntyrean sort of naturalism is acceptable ultimately depends on answers to some rather large questions involving the nature of rationality (for example, whether it is tradition-constituted in something like the way MacIntyre says).[@toner2008sorts 248]\
}