{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red53\green53\blue53;\red20\green20\blue20;\red24\green147\blue14;
\red15\green52\blue169;\red67\green67\blue67;}
\deftab560
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 # Read Davidson, \'91How is Weakness of the Will Possible?\'92, in 
\i Essays on Actions and Events
\i0 , 21\'9642.\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 # Insert a quote from Jessica Peirce on the Laplacian view of nature  683, Bioethics Text book\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf2 # Education design article cite from google alerts in chapters early. Put it in and find it online.\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf3 \
# Read 
\b Ahlstrom, Epistemic Value\

\b0 # Read Coup, Critique of Shafer-Landau\
\
# Ahlstrom, Kristoffer, Moderate Epistemic Expressivism\
\
# Russon, John.  \'93Aristotle\'92s Animative Epistemology\'94 in Idealistic Studies. \
\
#Brown, Stephen. Really Naturalizing Virtue, Ethic@, v. 4, n.1, p. 7-22, Jun 2005. \
\
Hempel, Carl G. Aspects of Scientific Explanation, The Free Press, 1965. \
\
Jacobs, Nathan. \'93On the Metaphysics of God and Creatures in the Eastern Pro-Nicenes\'94\
\
Gert, Joshua. \'93Problems for Moral Twin Earth Arguments\'94, Synthese, Vol. 150, No. 2 (2006), pp. 171-183. \
\
Joyce, Richard. \'93What neuroscience can (and cannot) contribute to metaethics\'94 in Moral Psychology Volume 3: The Neuroscience of Morality: Emotion, Brain Disorders, and Development W. Sinnott-Armstrong (ed.). MIT, 2008. \
\
MacIntyre, Alasdair. Dependent Rational Animals: Why Human Beings Need the Virtues. Open Court, 1999. \
\
Mend ham, Matthew. \'93Kant and the \'91Distinctively Moral Ought\'92: A Platonic-Augustinian Defense, Against MacIntyre\'94, Journal of Religion, Vol. 87, No. 4 (2007), pp.556-591. \
\
Finlay, Stephen. \'93Four Faces of Moral Realism\'94, Philosophy Compass 2, 2007. \
\
Morgan, Seiriol. "Naturalism and Normativity."Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 72, no. 2 (2006): 319-344.\
\
Wielenberg, Erik J. "On the Evolutionary Debunking of Morality*." Ethics 120, no. 3 (2010): 441-464.\
\
Wielenberg, E. (2010). \
\
Arnhart, Larry. "The new Darwinian naturalism in political theory." American Political Science Review 89, no. 02 (1995): 389-400.\
\
Vogler, Candace. "Modern moral philosophy again: Isolating the promulgation problem." In Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, vol. 106, pp. 345-362. Aristotelian Society, 2006.\
\
Vogler, C. (2006). Modern moral philosophy again: Isolating the promulgation problem. In Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society (Vol. 106, pp. 345-362). Aristotelian Society.\
\
Huneman, Philippe. "Naturalising purpose: From comparative anatomy to the \'91adventure of reason\'92." Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 37, no. 4 (2006): 649-674.\
\
Poole, Randall Allen. "The neo-idealist reception of kant in the Moscow Psychological Society." Journal of the History of Ideas 60, no. 2 (1999): 319-343.\
\
Railton, Peter. "Aesthetic value, moral value, and the ambitions of naturalism."Aesthetics and ethics: Essays at the intersection (1998): 59-105.\
\
Scanlon, Thomas M. Being realistic about reasons. Oxford University Press, 2014.\
\
Simpson, Peter, and Sine Quibus Non. "Goodness and nature." Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff (1987).\
\
Jenkins, John. Is \
Hacker\uc0\u8208 Wright, John. "What is natural about foot's ethical naturalism?." Ratio22, no. 3 (2009): 308-321.\
\
Thompson, Michael. What is it to Wrong Someone?: A Puzzle about Justice. Faculty of Law, University of Toronto, 2003.\
\
\
\
Horgan, Terence. "From supervenience to superdupervenience: Meeting the demands of a material world." Mind (1993): 555-586.\
\
\
\
FIND AND READ\
\
Odenbaugh, Jay. "Nothing in ethics makes sense except in the light of evolution? Natural goodness, normativity, and naturalism." Synthese (2015): 1-25.\
\
\
\
Barham, James Alan. "Teleological Realism in Biology." PhD diss., University of Notre Dame, 2011.\
\
Lott, Micah. "Why be a good Human Being? Natural Goodness, Reason, and the Authority of Human Nature." Philosophia 42, no. 3 (2014): 761-777.\
\
The central claim of Aristotelian naturalism is that moral goodness is a kind of species-specific natural goodness. Aristotelian naturalism has recently enjoyed a resurgence in the work of philosophers such as Philippa Foot, Rosalind Hursthouse, and Michael Thompson. However, any view that takes moral goodness to be a type of natural goodness faces a challenge: Granting that moral goodness is natural goodness for human beings, why should we care about being good human beings? Given that we are rational creatures who can \'91step back\'92 from our nature, why should we see human nature as authoritative for us? This is the authority-of-nature challenge. In this essay, I state this challenge clearly, identify its deep motivation, and distinguish it from other criticisms of Aristotelian naturalism. I also articulate what I consider the best response, which I term the practical reason response. This response, however, exposes Aristotelian naturalism to a new criticism \'96 that it has abandoned the naturalist claim that moral goodness is species-specific natural goodness. Thus, I argue, Aristotelian naturalists appear to face a dilemma: Either they cannot answer the authority-of-nature challenge, or in meeting the challenge they must abandon naturalism. Aristotelian naturalists might overcome this dilemma, but doing so is harder than some Aristotelians have supposed. In the final sections of the paper, I examine the difficulties in overcoming the dilemma, and I suggest ways that Aristotelians might answer the authority-of-nature challenge while preserving naturalism.\
\
\
For more recent treatments of Aristotle's teleology, see Nussbaum (1978); Sorabji (1980); Baime (1980); and, most of all, Gotthelf (1976).\
\
 \
\
Barham 2011 \'97 Teleological Realism in Biology\
\
More specifically, I will be exploring the idea that teleological discourse, both in everyday life and in biological science, is best understood as describing real, objectively existing properties of biological systems, quite apart from human interests and conceptual schemes. This means the claim that\'97assuming a broadly realistic stance towards the objects of everyday and biological discourse\'97teleological phenomena should be viewed as being on an ontological par with such well-known biological phenomena as 1 On this distinction, see Lennox (1992). 2 locomotion, phagocytosis, photosynthesis, and the like. I will refer to this basic claim as \'93teleological realism in biology\'94 (TRB, for short).\
\
 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf3 Neo-Aristotelian Ethical Naturalism\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf3 \

\i Rosalind Hursthouse\

\i0 The proponents of neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism (henceforth \'93Aristotelian naturalism\'94 for short) include\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf3 \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf3 Geach (1956, 1977), \
Anscombe because her work has influenced so many others. (Gaut [1997, 2002] should also be known as a significant contributor.) \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf3 \
Foot (2001), \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf3 Hursthouse (1999), \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf3 McDowell (1995), \
MacIntyre (1999), \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf3 Nussbaum (1993, 1995), and \
Thompson (1995); and also \
\
Brown, Adams,  \
\
Their views are so unlike those of other proponents of ethical naturalism (see Naturalism, Ethical), and they occupy such an unfamiliar position in philosophy, that they are simultaneously criticized on at least two quite different bases. Some say they are not trying to offer naturalism at all, because they avowedly employ a moralized conception of human nature; some say they are trying to offer naturalism insofar as they offer a biological foundation for ethics, but that either this has counterintuitive upshots or the biology is Aristotle's and thereby pre-Darwinian and not a proper naturalistic foundation at all.\
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf3 Neo-Aristotelian Naturalism and the Indeterminacy Objection\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf3 \
Philippa Foot\'92s virtue ethics remains an intriguing but divisive position in normative ethics. For some, the promise of grounding human virtue in natural facts is a useful method of establishing normative content. For others, the natural facts on which the virtues are established appear naively uninformed when it comes to the empirical details of our species. In response to this criticism, a new cohort of neo-Aristotelians like John Hacker-Wright attempt to defend Foot by reminding critics that the facts at stake are not claimed to be explanatory descriptions of the kind provided by empirical science. Instead, they are derived from a logical form that is presupposed when we categorize something as a living organism. Neo-Aristotelian naturalism is therefore said to be immune to the empirical defeaters put forward as criticism of the theory. I argue that neo-Aristotelians like Hacker-Wright can only rescue Foot\'92s naturalism from being uninformed by exposing it to an indeterminacy objection: if claims about human virtue are grounded in facts about our species other than those derived from science, then the position becomes immune to empirical defeaters at the cost of being unable to generate informative normative content.\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://philpapers.org/go.pl?id=GOWVAN&proxyId=&u=http%3A%2F%2Forigin.web.fordham.edu%2Fimages%2Fundergraduate%2Fpsychology%2Ffisher%2Fvirtue%2520and%2520nature.pdf"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 Virtue and nature}}\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl260
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://philpapers.org/s/Christopher%20W.%20Gowans"}}{\fldrslt 
\b \cf5 Christopher W. Gowans}}
\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://philpapers.org/asearch.pl?pub=1019"}}{\fldrslt 
\i\b0 \cf5 Social Philosophy and Policy}}
\b0  25 (1):28-55 (2008)\

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trmaxw24000 \tamart200 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1040\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr400 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth9360\clftsWidth3 \clmaxw20000 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb200 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl420
\cf6 Abstract\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl420
\cf0 The Neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism of Philippa Foot and Rosalind Hursthouse purports to establish a naturalistic criterion for the virtues. Specifically, by developing a parallel between the natural ends of nonhuman animals and the natural ends of human beings, they argue that character traits are justified as virtues by the extent to which they promote and do not inhibit natural ends such as self-preservation, reproduction, and the well-being of one\'92s social group. I argue that the approach of Foot and Hursthouse cannot provide a basis for moral universalism, the widely-accepted idea that each human being has moral worth and thus deserves significant moral consideration. Foot and Hursthouse both depict a virtuous agent as implicitly acting in accord with moral universalism. However, with respect to charity, a virtue they both emphasize, their naturalistic criterion (especially in the more elaborate form developed by Hursthouse) at best provides a warrant for a restricted form of charity that extends only to a limited number of persons. There is nothing in the natural ends of human beings, as Foot and Hursthouse understand these, that gives us a reason for having any concern for the well-being of human beings as such\
\
\
Beg and Davis, Alignment of Ethical Naturalism and Neo-Kantian Non-Naturalism\
\
\cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf5 Neo-Aristotelian Attempts to Bind Morality to Human Nature\
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://philpapers.org/s/Daniel%20Hirst"}}{\fldrslt Daniel Hirst}}\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://philpapers.org/asearch.pl?pub=3850"}}{\fldrslt 
\i\b0 \cf5 Emergent Australasian Philosophers}}
\b0  1 (1) (2008)\

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trcbpat1 \trmaxw24000 \tamart200 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1040\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr400 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth14060\clftsWidth3 \clmaxw20000 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb200 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl420
\cf6 Abstract\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl420
\cf0 The purpose of this paper is to examine recent neo-Aristotelian attempts to tie morality to human nature. I look specifically at the work in this field conducted by Philippa Foot and Rosalind Hursthouse. In particular, I articulate their distinct use of the word \'91good\'92 , and how in making this move they illuminate what we are doing when we make ethical evaluations. I then look at two pieces written by Julia Annas and Bernard Williams which attempt to criticise the neo-Aristotelian project. I ultimately defend the neo-Aristotelian argument that moral activity is on par with self-interested behaviour in any evaluation of practical rationality\
\
\cell \lastrow\row
}