{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Neo-Aristotelians are united on ethical naturalism but divided on how exactly to spell out that naturalism. Each strategy has its challenges and attractions, which deserve a careful review.\
\
### Two strategies\
\
First, what are neo-Aristotelians united on? They are united on the idea that the human life form, including our capacities for rational reflection and action, can bridge the is-ought gap -- or rather that human nature, properly understood, can defy the opposition between is and ought, fact and value, descriptivity and normativity. Thompson, Hursthouse, Foot, McDowell, MacIntyre, and Brown are united in the thought that some natural formal or teleological facts -- whether that is Hursthouse's "characteristic", or a "life-form"^[@thompson2008life, 57] or "form of life"[@mcdowell1979virtue 339], or "human nature" -- are inherently normative. Rather than "bridging" the gap between "is" and "ought", they defy the opposition. \
\
When we describe, say, the characteristic activities of the human life form as acquiring language, conversing with other humans, and acquiring knowledge -- if that is a genuinely human norm, then someone who is willfully ignorant, or willfully mute, or willfully antisocial, is to some degree defective qua human. If someone is mute, ignorant, or suffers from an antisocial mental disorder by bad fortune, say by being born with genetic problems or being born into a circumstance wherein they are deprived of resources to acquire knowledge, study, grow, experiment, that person would be pitiable and not well-off, due to no fault of their own. By contrast, someone who is wilfully in pursuit of knowledge would be admirable. Maybe not *morally* admirable yet, but admirable in exemplifying their human life form and doing the kind of things *humans do*. The way that ducks fly south for winter, human beings pursue and acquire and amass and transmit knowledge. \
\
What are neo-Aristotelians divided on? They are divided on whether the human life form can undercut the is-ought gap in virtue of being an instance of an organic life form like any other or in virtue of being a unique, rational life form endowed with the capacity for society, culture, rationality, or practical agency. \
\
These two strategies represent two different kinds of potential normativity: biological or rational, animal or cultural, teleonomic or teleological, organic or social.^[Cf. @arnhart1988. Arnhart explains the difference between various kinds of natural functions, including those that are candidates for genuinely *teleological* functionality.] These two strategies go under many names. For example, Christopher Toner distinguishes between the \'93biological naturalism\'94 of Thompson and Foot (and later MacIntyre) from the \'93second naturalism\'94 or \'93excellence naturalism\'94 or \'91culturalism\'92 of McDowell and (early) MacIntyre. Julia Annas distinguishes between the sort of naturalism that builds on the *biological* nature of humanity (at the expense of the odd normativity of our rationality) the sort that builds on the *rational* nature of humanity (at the expense of the mundane descriptivity of biology).^[Cf. Julia Annas, "Virtue Ethics: What Kind of Naturalism?" in @gardiner2005virtue.]^[Although neo-Aristotelians are fairly well divided over these two strategies, they seem united against a third, even more ambitious strategy. I should at least mention it here. That is to defend the view that *all* of nature is normative, even inorganic matter. Call this cosmic teleology. Cosmic teleology is the notion that everything -- including stars and rocks -- "has a purpose", as if the cosmos were somehow organized and *going somewhere*. Such natural normativity in the form of natural teleology does have its recent defenders. For atheistic version of cosmic teleology, see @nagel2012mind; for non-human centered versions see @leslie1996universes and @mulgan2015purpose. For Thomistic versions, see @feser2009aquinas; and @kreeft2012.] \
\
The basic difference between the two is pretty clear. Either natural normativity is intrinsic to human life insofar as we live in cultures or to all organisms insofar as they are alive.  My preferred terms to distinguish these two strategies are "Organic" and "Social" or "Practical" normativity. \
\
Let's examine both of these. They each have their costs and strenghts. First, I will offer an initial assessment of each strategy. \
\
### Social Normativity\
\
The first strategy Social Normativity. It is by far the safer strategy. On Social Normativity, something about humanity is naturally and inherently self-defining and end-direccted. For example, perhaps one of the natural functions of rationality is to construct goals for itself and legislate laws for itself.[Compare with @korsgaard1996sources. Korsgaard's argument about the "Authority of Reflection" builds a case that human autonomy -- the ability to be a law to oneself -- is the source of normative authority. In other words, my own identity as a rational human agent obligates me to behave morally.] On this view, ethical conclusions are irreducibly based upon human facts such as human rationality, human culture, or human excellence. \
\
I call this view "Social" to distinguish it from non-human nature, but it could as well be called "Practical" or "Rational" normativity. Pretty clearly, human cognitive and and practical behaviors are inherently end-directed or teleological. We do not just act randomly. We do not only act according to the promptings of instinct (that too). Rather, we act *on reasons,* both individually and in groups. We act to achieve goals. Whether we arise from bed *in order to* give a talk, or drive to work *in order to* do a good job, or pursue a career *for* satisfaction and a profitable retirement, we are directing ourselves toward ends. In groups, too, we pursue shared goals, deliberate about *what is to be done*: Congress aims to pass just and beneficial laws. The school board aims to increase enrollment and balance the budget. Expanding our focus from individual actions or projects, we can put the point more strongly: all of human life is a practice.^[The teleological nihilism (of say, hardcore determinists) says that not even human practices are teleological. There are no "purposes" or natural ends anywhere in the world *including* in human actions. Even our practices, behaviors, and lives are purposeless, even to ourselves. I discuss teleological nihilism below. Cf. @dennett1995darwin.] \
\
In *After Virtue*, MacIntyre defends social teleology against its more biological, organic alternative. He emphasizes "second nature" far more than primary nature. That is, he finds a ground of normativity not in our life-form but in us: in our social identities, our culture, our rationality. For example, he announces that his account of virtue is "happily not Aristotelian\'85 although this account of the virtues is teleological, it does not require any allegiance to Aristotle's metaphysical biology."[@macintyre1984after 197] The "metaphysical biology" MacIntyre refers to here is the metaphysically realist view that formal and final causes inhere (and in fact constitute) biological species.  Though he denies Aristotle's form of ethics based on the normativity of human biology, MacIntyre does most emphatically argue for teleological ethics based on the normativity of *human society and rationality*. He grounds teleology not in non-human nature but in "human nature," specifically our practical, social nature, which he calls "social teleology."\
\
The social normativity strategy is followed by McDowell, Hursthouse, and the early MacIntyre. Even Iris Murdoch assumed that human life has \'93no external point or \uc0\u964 \u949 \u955 \u959 \u962 \'94, but that it has a point *from within.*[@murdoch1998sovereignty] It is impossible, in other words, to bring our own human life, without remainder, under the concept of an *event.* Human life is an event too, but it must be brought under the concept of an intentional action or practice aiming at a goal.^[I will summarize the MacIntyrean notion of 'practice' in a later chapter. Here I only mean a more general notion of an operation or activity.] This insight has important implications for ethics, as well as other fields: action theory, sociology, anthropology, philosophy of mind, and so on.[Cf. @thompson2008life.] But the point here is that, since we act in groups and for reasons, teleology is a real feature of our social nature. The drawbacks which I shall explore in a later chapter are, in brief, these: the defender of the natural social normativity cannot avoid accepting an irreducible human/world dualism and an incorrigible cultural relativism. \
\
### Organic Normativity \
\
The second and broader neo-Aristotelian strategy for discovering natural norms aims to show that something about organic life as a whole is both descriptive and normative. Call this view biological or organic normative naturalism. \
\
Organic normativity says that being alive is a natural state in which certain natural norms obtain but come into danger of not being met.  At the level of individual organisms, one of the functions of *being alive at all* is that plants, animals, insects, and microbes perform whatever movements are necessary for them to survive, grow, and develop into the state of species-specific maturity. So the conditions or states of affairs in which these movements and this development does not happen are instances of a kind of natural badness for those species or ecosystems. At the level of interconnected systems of organisms such as ecosystems, rainforests, and coral reefs need certain things to survive and thrive. The sense of "need" here is not a pragmatic or utilitarian one but a formal and teleological sense. \
\
Patterns of organic normativity obtain not only in particular species or ecosystems, but the entire global network of organic life. The importance if seeing organisms in a synoptic view can be read off the deliverances of biological sciences.  Since all organisms share common features arising from their common origin, the present situation of organic life represents an intricate web of symmetrical and non-symmetrical interdependences.^[Chemist Michael Mautner summarizes: "Molecular biology shows that all organic cellular life share a common feature, self-reproduction through gene/protein protein cycles." @mautner2009life.] Consider the intricate interconnections between humans, other mammals, and microcellular life. Virtually no life could not survive on the earth without oxygen and trees produce almost 20% of the earth's oxygen. And consider the microbial organisms which occupy the human body, especially the stomach intestines and other parts of the digestive system. Studying these organisms is one exciting frontier of medical science. They are not parts of our body but they are essential the functioning of our body.  Or consider organisms that are not central in any direct way to human life or human endeavors, such as ocean phytoplankton. These provide most of the remaining 80% of the earth's oxygen not supplied by forests; and they form the rock bottom base of the global food chain. If by some catastrophe all of the ocean plankton were destroyed, or a sufficient percentage of it, one by one like a line of dominos the entire ecosystem would eventually collapse.  \
\
All this might seem to obvious to mention. But we must start with the obvious when attempting to understand how exactly the order of nature works. Organic naturalism is simply the interpretation that the complex biological system on earth cannot be exhaustively and scientifically described without normative concepts and terms. Organic naturalism is the belief that all living organisms have ineliminable, irreducible, normative properties. As Thomas Nagel puts it, with the existence of life in the cosmos arises the existence of beings "for which things can be good or bad."[@nagel2012mind, 117.] If you like, the order of objective value is the order of biological life.\
\
Organic Teleology is the preferred strategy of Foot, Thompson, and the later MacIntyre. It seems to have won over Annas, Brown, and Barham, and a host of other philosophers and scientists.[@ward1971kant; @arnhart1988; @johnson2005; @huneman2006naturalising; @leunissen2010explanation. For a detailed exposition of the full menu of philosophical options, cf.@perlman2004teleology.] \
\
The primary objection to overcome is the **Bald Nature Challenge** on behalf of an allegedly scientific conception of nature that excludes teleology and other normativity from nature.  I should call this the "Laplacian" picture.[@plantinga2011conflict 84] Plantinga explains that the bald, disenchanted picture of nature that excludes all consciousness -- both divine and human -- should not be pinned on Newton, who was a pious Christian, but fits better with Pierre-Simon Laplace. \
\
Organic naturalism is not without its problems, of course. Supposing that organic teleology -- the normativity of all  organisms -- *could possibly* underwrite normative conclusions about human ethics, how would we know these natural norms? Is belief in them scientific or not? For many, scientific naturalism just is the commitment to believe all and only the best deliverances of all the sciences. But other ethical naturalists like Richard Boyd and Peter Railton would be quick to observe, at this juncture, that natural kinds themselves are part of the vocabulary of natural science.[Cf. @boyd1991realism; @boyd1988moral; @railton1986moralrealism.] And indeed, part of my strategy for defending the truth and scientific credentials of Footian naturalism is to appeal to generic truths about natural kinds. \
\
\
\
Both social and organic strategies would work as groundings for ethical naturalism. The pair have their advantages against non-naturalism and rival naturalisms. However, each has its cost.  The cost of organic naturalism seems to be a "non-scientific" picture of nature. The cost of social naturalism is incorrigible cultural relativism and an undesirable nature/human dualism. In the spirit of devil-may-care adventure seeking, I find it preferable to pursue the more ambitious strategy of defending natural normativity in all of organic nature, not just human beings. In my view, the costs of organic naturalism are not so great as they first appear. Furthermore, the costs of social naturalism are greater than they first appear. For teleology is a respectable, natural, scientific phenomenon, or can be plausibly defended as *a* respectable scientific phenomenon that can be accepted into our scientific worldview. As Stephen Brown, for instance, says that "naturalized virtue ethics assumes that living things have ends in reference to which they can be evaluated... a neo-Aristotelian account of teleology is plausible both from the view of common sense and from a more scientific vantage point."[@brown2008virtue 20] So in the end, organic naturalism makes a stronger case.  In a later chapter, I criticize social naturalism. The remainder of this chapter will consist of an initial defense of organic normativity. \
\
\
}