{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab560
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Notes on Chapter 3\
\pard\pardeftab560\slleading20\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\'97\
Humans are natural organisms. According to the arguments above, all of organic nature is subject to evaluation according to patterns of natural normativity. Recall Hursthouse's statement that ethical evaluations of *human beings* "depend upon our identifying what is characteristic of the species in question."[@hursthouse1998virtue chapter 9 abstract.] The 'characteristic', I take it, is a differentiam determining or defining the human life form, or nature, or archetype. \
\
One sort of reader might object that such a search is futile. Other natural kinds \'97 physical, chemical, organic kinds \'97 exhibit relatively stable features: *All* metal is conductive, and *all* tigers are striped. But there is nothing true of *all* human beings. Any patterns can be subverted. Stephen Brown mentions the paradox that, "Human nature is variability itself."[@brown1999human] Bernard Williams, more pointedly, says human nature is a "mess." \
\
If humans are in fact a mess, then the true generics accurately picking out their characteristic behaviors would be messy; and the normative conclusions to be derived from them would be equally messy. Humans are occasionally irrational and always variable. Human beings posit themselves, create themselves, define their values, chart their destinies, and all in different ways. \
\
A related point is that even if we found truly universal patterns within humanity, such would be irrelevant to ethics. As rational beings, we can stand back from putatively universal patterns and ask whether we ought to conform to them. In a word, perhaps human rationality frees us from the determinism of our life form. Hursthouse acknowledges this pair of objections: \
\
>\'85 ethical naturalism looks to be doomed to failure if it depends on identifying what is characteristic of human beings as a species, in the way their pleasures and pains and ways of going on are characteristic of the other species. By and large we can't identify what is characteristic of human beings as a species in this way--there is too much variety. And even if we could, it looks as though we would not allow anything we identified to carry any normative weight if we thought it was something we could change. So is ethical naturalism, after all, a non\uc0\u8208 starter?"[@hursthouse1998virtue 222.]\
\
The search for true generics about human beings and the human life form is not futile. While the desired generics cannot *ignore* or *contradict* our status as physical, living, animals, they also cannot be *merely* descriptions of our genes, organ systems, 30 billion brain neurons, and so on. They must also capture what is ethical or potentially ethical about human beings as rational creatures. As an example, "humans are language-using primates" is the kind of generic we must defend as *both* "objective" and scientific *and* practical and ethical. \
\
Offering an argument for the truth of the generic that 'humans are practical, rational primates' and addressing these objections will occupy us for this chapter and beyond. }