{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 # Virtue and Practical Reasoning\
\
\\setlength\{\\epigraphwidth\}\{.95\\textwidth\}\
\\begin\{epigraphs\}\
\\qitem\{There could be no reasons unless a rational animal has a general conception of its own good, and thus a general sense of how to live.\}%\
\{---\\textsc\{Jennifer Frey, \\begin\{em\}The Will to Do Good\\end\{em\} 79.\}\}\
\\centering\
\\end\{epigraphs\}\
\
\
The three theses of this chapter are as follows: \
1. There can be no adequate theory of neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics without a theory of practical rationality. \
2. Practical reason is a substantive (i. e., value-laden) process that defines human beings as practical primates aiming at the good.\
3. Practical reasoning is both practical and rational; that is, practical reasons (by themselves) are able to motivate, and they are liable to critical reflection just as much as evidential or demonstrative reasons. \
4. The term  "moral reasons" is often applied to (a) other-regarding reasons, (b) overriding, verdictive reasons, or (c) non-prudential reasons. On my view, the conflation of any one of these or all of them with "morality" is a confusion. The preferred term is simply practical reasons, which may be prudential or non-prudential, and self-regarding or other regarding. The overriding practical reason is the thing to do, the best practical reason at the time, including the considerations of others. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0       1.     There can be no adequate theory of ethics without a theory of practical rationality. The reason it does not automatically seem so is that we artificially divide "practical reasoning" which is about prudential or self-regarding concerns from "moral reasoning" which is about moral or other-regarding concerns. I must show the genuinely moral significance of practical reasoning for ethical living. \'a0Practical reasoning helps us to answer the question, "How should one live?" The question presumes a distinction between how one *should* live and how one in fact *does* live or how one *might* live -- perhaps how we might be inclined by our baser nature to food, drink, sexual pleasure, and comfort. There seems to be a division between moral and prudential reasons. Moral reasons help us resolve dilemmas, prudential reasons help us form long-term life plans. This corresponds to Pincoff's distinctions: "character ethics" is all about one's character and life, as opposed to "quandary ethics", which is about resolving moral dilemmas. \'a0This is the familiar frame, but it is a mistake. \uc0\u8232 \
      2.    McDowell: Virtue is knowledge. It is a practical form of knowledge. Practical knowledge is not codifiable; but it is still knowledge. Not even evidential knowledge is codifiable. But it explains why we act. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
\
In this section, I summarize McDowell's argument that virtue is a particular kind of non-codifiable knowledge -- namely, practically reasoning about how to live by being sensitive to the requirements imposed by various situations. I trace the objections McDowell mentions to his own account and his responses to them. Then, I point out an ambiguity in McDowell's account that my own account of practical reasoning avoids. \
\
McDowell aims to support his own rendition of the old Socratic thesis that virtue is a kind of knowledge. Namely, virtue as a whole is a perceptual sensitivity to salient facts and what to do about them; virtues in particular are specific manifestations of that perceptual sensitivity. \
\
To see why it makes sense to conceive of virtue as practical knowledge, take a platitudinous value such as kindness. Suppose that kindness really is a virtue. What does it mean to predicate the virtue of kindness to someone? \
\
A person who merely happens to be kind or who commits acts of kindness resulting from blind instinct does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. A person who practices kindness one time, or every now and then, likewise does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. Rather,  justify the ascription of a virtue, we must identify when a person "has a reliable sensitivity to a certain sort of requirement which situations impose on behavior" and such "deliverances of a reliable sensitivity are cases of knowledge."[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] McDowell is pointing at three or four plausible criteria: reliability, sensitivity, practical knowledge, and intentional behavior.  *Reliability* means the kind person must be *regularly* or *habitually* disposed to kind thoughts, feelings, and behaviors; *sensitivity* means that the kind person demonstrates a perceptual sensitivity to the fact that a friend is in need, a child is sad, an elderly parent  is lonely; *practical knowledge* means the kind person knows what to do in such situations; and *intentional behavior* means that the person correctly feels the imposition to avoid cruel and indifferent behavior and to act on what the situation requires. \
\
The kind of knowledge where one is sensitivity to reasons for behavior is at least necessary for virtue. But is it sufficient? McDowell offers two answers. \
\
the first is that when a virtuous person is sensitive to the \'93requirement imposed by the situation" that requirement must "exhaust his reason for acting as he does.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] It would disqualify the act as a candidate for an example of kindness if the agent performed it *because* it was kind *and because good repute was likely to follow*. If we run the same calculus on each particular virtue, we can hypothesize that virtuous agents\'92 behavior in each case is explained by their sensitivity to those particular kinds of reasons. In turn, their behavior in general (when virtuous) is explained by their sensitivity in general. He concludes: \
\
>Thus the particular virtues are not a batch of independent sensitivities. Rather, we use the concepts of the particular virtues to mark similarities and dissimilarities among the manifestations of a single sensitivity which is what virtue, in general, is: an ability to recognize requirements which situations impose on one's behavior. It is a single complex sensitivity of the sort which we are aiming to instill when we aim to inculcate a moral outlook.[@mcdowell1979virtue 333]\
\
Now, most of the time, the question of 'what to do' in general or how to live is not simply a question of what is the kind thing to do. The question of what to do is most often a question of what is advisable *overall*.  McDowell grants that there are a many different kinds of reasons for action. For it might be that one is sensitive to what another would feel but still fail to act rightly. He gives the example of an overindulgent parent who is far *too* sensitive to the feelings of the child, or rather *not sensitive enough* to other considerations, like the considerations of the child\'92s health or of fairness to the other children. The virtuous person is sensitive to a whole range of reasons; since reason \uc0\u966 1 and reason \u966 2 might commend different acts, part of virtue must be a meta-cognitive capacity to reflect upon the various requirements imposed by a situation, to rank and order them, and act accordingly. One of my quibbles with McDowell's  account will center on this point. McDowell seems willing to let the narrow considerations about "what is required by the situation" explode to include *any* practical considerations. I will return to this quibble below. \
\
The two objections McDowell brings up are these: first, is the kind of practical knowledge that constitutes virtue *rational*, codifiable, and consistent? And secondly, is it really practical -- or can't one "perceive what a situation requires" without doing what is required? Both of these objections are liable to come from the non-cognitivist or expressivist critic.\
\
The first objection has to do with knowledge and requires a deeper look at reasoning. The paradigmatic case of knowledge is theoretical knowledge, i.e., *knowledge that p*. Such knowledge is categorical and propositional, and codifiable into logical systems of necessary relations. One objection can be put simply as follows: the paradigmatic kind of knowledge is codifiable.  Virtue is a kind of knowledge. So, it would seem to be necessary that virtue-knowledge is codifiable. However, virtue-knowledge is practical knowledge or \'91knowing-what-to-do\'92, which is not codifiable. Therefore, virtue must not be knowledge. \
\
The problem with this objection, McDowell thinks, is not so much a problem with our moral theory but a problem with our conception of rationality. The problem stems from a \'93deep-rooted prejudice\'94 that rationality is a rule-following procedure. If rationality is a rule-following procedure, then it follows that *either* practical rationality and morality are likewise rule-following procedures *or* that practical rationality and morality is not, ultimately, sufficiently *rational*.  Some philosophers (often followers of Hume but not necessarily Hume himself) think that morality is a not rational domain but a domain of sentiments, desires, commitments, approvals, and so on. Other philosophers (often followers of Kant) think that morality is a rational domain and hence must be a matter of identifying first principles and \'93applying\'94 them to particular situations. But what they share in common is a belief that \'93rationality must be explicable in terms of being guided by a formulable universal principle.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337. ] MacIntyre, similarly, denies the assumption that normative ethical rules can be derived from universal ethical principles the way we \'93apply\'94 universal logical truths to particular logical conclusions via a middle term.[@macintyre1984does.] This common belief McDowell wishes to refute. \
\
McDowell\'92s discussion here (drawing on Wittgenstein and others) is hard to follow. The point seems to be that even apparently obvious cases where the rational thing to do is to follow an objective rule turn out to be cases of a much messier process in which there is no such objective rule by appeal to which we can explain rational thoughts or behaviors. For example, take the objective rule of extending a series of numbers two at a time. Suppose Bob instructs Charlie to \'93add 2\'94 to a number and continue applying the rule indefinitely.  We tend to be confident Charlie will \'93churn out the appropriate behavior with the sort of reliability which a physical mechanism, say a piece of clockwork, might have.\'94 We tend to expect that Charlie will produce \'932, 4, 6, 8,\'94 etc. McDowell thinks this confidence is based on postulating a \'93psychological mechanism, underlying his behavior, by an inference analogous to that whereby one might hypothesize a physical structure underlying the observable motions of some inanimate object.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] The \'93ground and nature of our confidence\'94 that we will reliably apply rules is not but a common form of life. \
\
The term \'91form of life\'92 is a term of art. It is drawn from Wittgenstein (and quoted with approval from Stanley Cavell). The term seems to refer to that difficult-to-define process of enculturation or formation.  For example, how do we learn reliably to use words in our native language? And why is it so much harder to attain fluency in a second language, even if we are immersed in it? Likewise, there is no clear mechanistic process that explains how a child learns to make exclamations -- such as a pained \'93ow!\'94 or an excited \'93ooh!\'94. There is no clear mechanistic process by which we learn when to laugh at jokes or when to cry in pity. Instead of a mechanistic process, McDowell suggests that we children learn such Our shared rationality, McDowell suggests, is not grounded in \'93external\'94 objective rules but in a shared form of life or what he calls a \'93congruence of subjectivities\'94.[@mcdowell1979virtue 339] \
\
McDowell admits this is a disconcerting hypothesis; it induces \'93vertigo.\'94 But, our response to such vertigo should not be to embrace a \'93consoling myth\'94. That myth he says is the two notions that (a) rule-following is a psychological mechanism that \'97 absent mistakes \'97 guarantees consistency, and (b) that there exist objective facts of the matter over and above the congruence of subjectivities. If we abandon these two notions and embrace the model of deductive rationality as grounded only in our intersubjective form of life, then the corresponding model of practical rationality will become tenable. \
\
McDowell argues that virtue is not codifiable, but that it is still a kind of knowledge. He also argues that virtue is consistent. This surfaces another question: if the virtuous person's knowledge of what to do is not codifiable, then how is it *consistent*? What guarantees that the moral person\'92s behavior is intelligibly the same from case to case? On the one hand, if moral knowledge is rational then it is consistent from case to case and situation to situation; but if, as McDowell has been arguing, both deductive reasoning and practical reasoning are not merely consistent by being like a rule-following machine or computer, how do we explain the virtuous person's reliably correct behavior? He answers this question by way of Aristotle's practical syllogisms.\
\
The 'practical syllogism' takes the following shape: \
\
1. X is good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. (E.g., it is good to instantiate justice in the classroom).\
2. Z would be X. (E.g., giving everyone a chance to re-take a quiz that was unavailable due to technical problems would instantiate justice in my classroom.)\
3. Therefore, Z would be good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. \
\
On the strictly deductive logical model, the role of the major premise is to provide rock solid universal ethical principles from which to derive particular moral duties. McDowell resists this model. On the strictly non-cognitivist model, there are no universal principles but only universal psychological states, such as consistent desires, plans, values, or norms. McDowell also resists this. Instead, the role of the major premise is to articulate a "certain conception of how to live... [namely] the *virtuous person's conception* of the sort of life a human being should lead."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343. Emphasis added.] \
\
What kind of life should a human being lead? The answer "cannot be definitively written down."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] Furthermore, "Any attempt to capture it in words will recapitulate the character of the teaching whereby it might be instilled: generalizations will be approximate at best..."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] If the kind of conception of a good life that the virtuous person has is approximate and non-codifiable, it becomes hard to see why we are bothering with formal syllogistic reasoning at this point. McDowell's response is that understanding virtue-knowledge within a the practical syllogism *does* a good job of providing a plausible explanation of moral motivation (reasons one might act in some way) and moral behavior (reasons one acted that way). To paraphrase McDowell: "Explanations of judgments about what to do are explanations of actions."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342. Verbatim, he says: "The explanations, so far treated as explanations of judgments about what to do, are equally explanations of actions."] I can explain your behavior by understanding that you were concerned for your friend\'92s welfare and reached out to help. Likewise, you can explain your decision to help by assuring me that you are concerned for your friend\'92s welfare. For McDowell, the general structure of the practical syllogism is useful. He says \'93the rationality of virtue\'85 is not demonstrable from an external standpoint.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 346]\
\
It is clear upon reflection that this account contains some circularity, for the virtuous person's conception of how to live is itself conditioned by what he called earlier 'the moral outlook.' That conception of how to live, in turn, conditions what particular saliences are noticed (what minor premises) and generates practical conclusions about what is to be done. The upshot of the combination of non-codifiability with a practical syllogistic form is that the virtuous person takes for a rule of life some conception of how to live but that this conception is part of what it means to be a virtuous person -- and thus ensues the vertigo.\
\
\
In sum, McDowell thinks virtue is a kind of knowledge or sensitivity to salient facts which call for a certain response and which intrinsically motivate a suitably sensitive (read: virtuous) person to respond in that way, at least in the absence of interfering passions. The hypothetical counterexample presented by his Humean critic is one wherein two agents are "sensitive to" or "notice" identical reasons for action but do not actually *act* identically. McDowell's response is that while noticing a requirement for action is necessarily motivating *to some extent*, other psychological factors may interfere with the resulting correct action.  Furthermore, the kind of "knowledge" that virtue amounts to is uncodifiable, but that does no harm to the account. Virtue-knowledge is rather a broad conception of how to live and a series of specific sensitivities to a range of specific practical reasons. Practical reasoning is *consistent*, moreover, but not by being "objective" (in the sense that even McDowell admits would be desirable) but by being rooted in our communal form of life --   precisely the same way in which logical reasoning is. \
\
While I find McDowell's view of virtue and reason illuminating, it leaves something to be desired. My complaint has to do with the relationship between narrowly moral reasons and broader practical reasons -- or again between moral reasoning and practical reasoning. Suppose I have a friend who can pretty well diagnose a car engine by listening to the way it whines or hums or clicks, where all I hear is noise. By McDowell's lights, my friend is sensitive to a range of requirements for action and knows what to do  -- e.g., oil change, new timing belt, and so on -- and so is "virtuous". It strains common sense to call any and all such sensitivities "virtues." \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0       2.    McDowell leaves two things to be desired: What is the relationship between the kind of moral reasoning that virtue is and broader, practical reasoning? Is the broader sort of practical reasoning, morally praiseworthy or not? If so, then is all intellectual virtue moral virtue? \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
McDowell seems to switch from talking about moral reasons to talking about *any* practical reason without any mention of the switch. For example, he admits that virtue knowledge cannot be reduced to any one sensitivity to a range of requirements for action but the requirements of kindness (say) must be balanced against others. Kindness is not the whole of virtue, and knowing what is to be done requires more than just the awareness of another's need. Rather, one might need to rank, order, and weigh three different kinds of reasons (kindness, fairness, appropriateness) or ten or fifteen before one resolved what to do. Is this overall process of weighing and ranking *moral reasoning*? He seems to be assuming that "moral reasons" is a name for the overriding sort of practical reasons. I wish to argue that this is a subtle mistake. \
\
What is needed is a fresh re-thinking of the relation between prudential and moral reasons. What is the relationship between the kind of moral reasoning that virtue is and broader, practical reasoning? Is the broader sort of practical reasoning, morally praiseworthy or not? \
\
\
## Practical Reasoning as Pursuing Good, Avoiding Evil\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0       3.    My alternative begins with a re-envisioning of practical reasoning as moving toward the good by identifying it as good, and moving away from the bad by identifying it as bad.\uc0\u8232 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 The alternative that is needed is to recapture the holistic view of practical reasoning as the activity that defines human life form. Gladly, this account of practical reason is plausible in its own right and reinforces what we have argued above about the generics that describe all organisms and human beings.  \
\
This section builds on the work of Philippa Foot and on Jennifer Frey's recent discussions of Anscombe and Aquinas. On the Aristotelian-Thomistic account, practical reasoning is an end-oriented activity that aims at the perceived good of one's form of life.  As Frey stated in the epigraph above, "There could be no reasons unless a rational animal has a general conception of its own good, and thus a general sense of how to live." \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0       4.    All living things seek their own natural good. Human beings do so rationally. \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
The first point in this case is that all organisms act toward ends, albeit without reflection.  Frey summarizes Aquinas in this way: \
\
>All living things are a self-sustaining system of powers that functions to bring the living thing into being and to sustain its being. The movement of any part of a living thing, at any particular moment, is necessarily explained by reference to the movement of the whole thing towards a single end: the coming to be, maintenance, or reproduction of that very form of life.[@frey 68] \
\
As I argued above, all living things exhibit teleological movement. They grow into maturity, which is the exemplification of their form of life. This form of life is what Aquinas calls a thing's "nature":  wolf hunts in packs by nature, trees extend roots into the ground by nature, reptiles warm themselves in the sun by nature, and so on. \
\
Obviously plants and animals do not "naturally incline" toward their good by reflecting or choosing it. Frey points out: \
\
>Aquinas would agree with us that it is a category mistake to say that a sunflower wants to grow towards the light, if by this we mean that the flower somehow registers a positive feeling or has an inner impression towards the light, which \'93causes\'94 it to move toward the light. The plant does not apprehend or desire anything; thus Aquinas is very careful to say that it does not have a power of appetite. In fact, Aquinas is at pains to note that a plant has no window onto the world at all\'97it just has conditions in which it characteristically comes into being, maintains, and reproduces itself.[@frey 69-70]\
\
The organic naturalism I have defended allows that normativity is present in all living beings. We notice differences across the biological world: Plants merely grow and reproduce; while animals grow, reproduce, and enjoy conscious experiences, such as sensory perceptions of material objects and of their own hungers, thirsts, pains, and so on. As we have seen, the difference in human beings is their ability to be aware of what happens by nature and (in some cases) to choose otherwise: humans grow, reproduce, and enjoy conscious experiences like other animals and also *know* that they do so. To quote John Haldane,  "things are specified by their power."[@haldane1998return 262] And we observe our "power" or capacity to engage in cognitive and deliberative activities. Simply put, we are able to reason, to reason theoretically and practically.\
\
\
Practical reasoning is the distinctly human activity. While animals can not only sense but *perceive*, humans have the capacity of "intellection," the power of abstracting the forms themselves from percepts. An animal can *sense* an informed, organized object; an animal can be affected by the object. But the human animal can *acquire information* from the organized object. The ability to perceive something *as*, or even to perceive something big and brown with a smudge on its nose, does not imply the ability to perceive that thing as a cat.[@haldane1996coming]\
\
When it comes to inclination or "appetite", animals pursue and avoid objects. The antelope pursues healthy grass and flees a lion. The animal can only experience what is good or bad for it as a particular object. Animals incline toward their own good. They also have sensory perception of beings. But animals do not perceive beings *as* falling under universal categories. By contrast, a human being can recognize universals and hence can take up its natural inclinations to pursue or flee as reasons in a deliberative act. The natural inclinations may be underwritten or overridden. Confronted with a bit of healthy food on someone else's plat, I may choose not to eat it, for I recognize it as *not mine*. Confronted with a lion in a zoo, I may choose not to flee, for I recognize it as *not dangerous*. Frey summarizes: \
\
>Rational animals, like any animal, have a natural inclination towards their good as a whole, and like lower animals this power is actualized through their apprehension of things in the world. But Aquinas argues that a rational animal relates to the world through the application of universal concepts, and thus it is inclined to pursue or avoid things under an intellectual, universal apprehension of them. Thus, Aquinas says that the will is inclined towards its objects under the formality of the \'93universal good,\'94 rather than the particular good.[@frey 75]\
\
We have been speaking of the human capacity for recognizing and pursuing particular ends as good. We need to expand our scope to include the whole of life, the conception of our human good that constitutes the answer to the question "how should one live?" McDowell gets this part right \'97 every rational practice is undertaking in pursuit of some particular end *in context* of a total conception of what is good in general. Frey says: \
\
>Consequently, we can say that rational animals have an understanding of different levels of ends, and at least a vague sense of how they are supposed to hang together as a whole. This conception of how it all hangs together is what Aquinas calls the ultimate end -- a rational animal\'92s general, conceptual understanding of how to live or go on. Aquinas thinks that any sane, mature adult will necessarily have cobbled together some such conception. Aquinas calls this conception \'93the universal good\'94, and he argues that it is the will\'92s proper object. Everything that is willed is willed under this rational aspect of good, as to be pursued because *in accord with my general conception of the good.* In fact, Aquinas thinks there could be no reasons unless a rational animal has a general conception of its own good, and thus a general sense of how to live. [@frey 78-9, italics in original.]\
\
Frey's argument here is that the question of 'how to live' is a question about my good as a human being; answering that question requires practically reasoning, which is a distinctively human activity. And since every "sane, mature adult" engages in this activity, every sane mature adult has a general notion about the answer. Without it, one would not act at all. Frey points out: \
\
>No human action is intelligible without attributing to the agent herself some conception of this end, no matter how inarticulate, unsystematic, or unreflective it might be. Aquinas takes it for granted that in coming to be a human being\'97i.e., being raised in a community of other human beings, coming into the possession of concepts, a language, and coming to have a world\'97one comes into some such conception, and thus comes to act voluntarily.[@frey 87] \
\
Every practical rational primate of sufficient age and maturity has some conception of their own human good which is, if you like, the ultimate practical reason answering the question of how to live. That is not to deny, that the answer arises in part due to the normal process of socialization. Rather, that our conception of how to live would arise that way is what we would predict for rational primates who speak and live in society. \
\
Comparing with theoretical reasoning: to be rational is to judge a proposition p as true or false, as best one can, in accord with the rational assessment of the reasons for affirming or denying p. Similarly, to be practically rationally is to judge a practical reason \uc0\u966  as good or bad, in accord with the rational assessment of the reasons for pursuing or avoiding \u966 . \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
Aquinas points out that the first thing rational beings apprehend is simply "existence" or "being" -- infants perceive that some things are there and others not there. They eventually come to perceive objects *as* objects, as individual objects, and to name and categorize them with language acquired in a social setting.  Likewise, the *practical rational* animal first apprehends simply "good" or "desirable" \'97 infants perceive that some things are to be pursued and others avoided. Aquinas says:\
\
>Now as "being" is the first thing that falls under the apprehension simply, so "good" is the first thing that falls under the apprehension of the practical reason, which is directed to action: since every agent acts for an end under the aspect of good. Consequently the first principle of practical reason is one founded on the notion of good, viz. that "good is that which all things seek after." Hence this is the first precept of practical reason, that "good is to be done and pursued, and evil is to be avoided."[@aquinas IIa. Q.94. Art. 2]\
\
The use of 'good' here, it bears repeating, not a special moral sense of good, but simply means 'desirable'. Good means 'to be pursued.' An entity is 'good' when it is considered as an object of inclination. Without such a general principle, practical reasoning and rational practice are unintelligible. \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0       5.    Practical reasoning is a process of identifying, weighing, ranking, and assembling practical reasons. There seems to be a division between procedural reasoning (assigning means to ends) and evaluative reasoning (picking or evaluating ends). But there is none. "There could be no reasons at all unless a rational animal has a general conception of its own good, and thus a general sense of how to live." In other words, all specific practical reasons about what to do are hooked into the general practical reason, namely a judgment about what is good or desirable. This is an orientation toward the good that all practical reasoners share.\
\
 6.    More specific than a general conception of the good, but less specific than particular maxims, are conceptions of basic goods such as knowledge, friendship, beauty, health, and so on. This is an orientation toward basic goods. Errors about basic goods are comparatively more devestating to the moral life than errors about more specific applications of good and bad.\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 The question "how should one live?" assumes a distinction between the ways one *should* live and the ways one *in fact* lives already. The first task is to step back from this distinction and ask an even more fundamental question: Why do we act at all? Why do we live? Why do we pursue anything? Why do we wake up in the morning in pursuit of some end?  The familiar frame that distinguishes between moral and prudential reasons is inadequate. \
\
\
\
\
What is the process of resolving what to do? Practical reasoning taken broadly can potentially include a variety of related deliberative processes: (a) considering future actions to be done, (b) reflecting on past actions already done, and (c) evaluating events or objects as desirable or undesirable. What all these have in common is the attempt to identify (or create) reasons to \uc0\u966  or not to \u966 . Practical reason is the process of identifying or coming up with *practical reasons*. Hence, the answer or answers to the "how to live?" question(s) will be a *practical* answer or set of answers, that is both an item of knowledge and also a plan or guide to living in the way specified by that knowledge. \
\
Narrowly, we engage in such practical reasoning about very specific circumstances ("should I stay or should I go?"). More generally, we engage in practical reasoning about quite general matters ("how should one live?"). Much of one's daily life does not consist in practical reasoning. With a general plan for how to live in place, and with no deep dilemmas, one can coast through a typical day by resting on habits, responding to stimuli such as hunger and thirst, and so on. Being asked to give a reason why one has that habit, however, will elicit a practical reason. Question: "Why are you going to that building?" Answer: "That's where I work." A proper answer need not cite one's desires or motivations; simply being the place where one works is sufficient (practical) reason to go inside. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0      
\b0 \
This process is *practical* by definition. Practical reasoning is not something one does *before* resolving what to do, as one picks up an item in a store *before* purchasing it. Practical reasoning is the name we give to the process of *resolving what to do*, as checking out from the store is the process of purchasing it. \
\
This process is practical *reasoning* by definition. Practical reasoning is thus like theoretical reasoning in at least one important respect: it is normative. Theoretical reasoning is a process by which I aim to determine *what to believe* -- to answer the question "What should I believe?" When I assess evidence for and against some proposition P, I am looking for *reasons* to believe P is true or false. The successful conclusion of a rational argument is the judgment that P or not-P. (Or I may not have enough evidence to judge either way, in which case I may withhold judgment.) Similarly, when I consider a scientific hypothesis, I suppose that P and then conduct an experiment that will reveal reasons that confirm or disconfirm the supposition. To fail to believe P upon coming to know good evidence for it, or to believe P in spite of good evidence against it, is to make an intellectual error. If Q entails P and I already know and affirm that Q, then I *ought* to affirm that P.  Similarly, if some reason to \uc0\u960  entails a reason to \u966 , and I already know and am committed to \u960 , then I ought to \u966 . \
\
My contention is that our default view of practical reasoning creatures ought to be that practical reason is both rational and practical, a kind of knowledge that is, absent any other psychological state, motivating. If this is right, then the burden of proof lies with those who would artificially divide and separate the *knowing* and the *practicing*. \
\
One does not practically reason about what to do *and then decide* to do it; there is no gap between the conclusion of a deliberation and a decision. To borrow Gibbard\'92s unforgettable phrasing, practical reasoning is \'93thinking how to live\'94.[@gibbard2009thinking] \
\
In the case of practical reasoning, then, reason and practice are not divisible. And so far as we know, there are no other purely theoretical reasoners. We can imagine angels, Artificial Intelligences, and Alpha Centaurians who think but do not act; but so far as we know, to be a reasoner at all is to be responsive to Sellars' "space of reasons", including both practical and theoretical reasons. This consideration is part of the reason why, in chapter 3, I insisted that practical reasoning, and *not* abstract theoretical reasoning, defines human nature. \
\
Without being clear on the very notion of practical reason, one cannot understand any of what the neo-Aristotelians are up to. Practical reasoning is not a value-neutral procedure, as I shall argue below. It is inextricably bound up in the moral life. Jack Weinstein explains the relation between practical reasoning and morality in this way: \
\
>The term practical rationality is derived from Aristotle\'92s *phronesis*. It is to be distinguished from *sophia*, a more technical form of reasoning. Practical rationality leads to more approximate conclusions; it takes context and relative facts into account, and it usually leads to moral or political conclusions.[@weinstein2003macintyre 60-61] \
\
*Phronesis* guides one in "answering" questions (or providing a range of strategies) to solve problems of action and appraisal. \
\

\b \uc0\u8232 \
      7.    The familiar division between moral and prudential practical reasons is not very old (about as old as Mill) and foreign to the Greek and neo-Aristotelian way of thinking. Instead, all practical reasons are "moral" reasons (in the sense that they are value judgments about what is to be done); and only some practical reasons are "moral" reasons in the sense that they are about what is good or bad pertaining to others. \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 The difficulty separating "moral" and "non-moral" problems is no fault of the account. It is indeed a strength. To make the distinction between "moral" and "non-moral" prudential or practical reasons more clear, it will be helpful to tell the story of how the distinction became muddled.\
\
\
\
\
\
MacIntyre came to the same conclusion, partially through his study of ethics. As a young philosopher, he was troubled about emotivism in particular and modern metaethics in general. Emotivists, intuitionists, naturalists, and error theorists all seemed to assume that moral terms are *referential.* If moral terms within moral judgments are supposed to pick out a property in the world, then either we must identify that property or (if we cannot) conclude that moral terms are literally meaningless. He argued that this assumption is a mistake. Instead, he concluded that the significance of moral judgments is that \'93they enable us to solve problems of appraisal and of action.\'94[@murphy2003macintyre 118, quoting MacIntyre\'92s master\'92s thesis *The Significance of Moral Judgments* p. 73] Instead of referring (or failing to refer) to a special 'moral property', all evaluative reasoning is practical reasoning. We employ moral judgments when we must evaluate something or when we must reason about what to do. Moral reasoning is not a special, mystical discipline divorced from prudential, instrumental, and other kinds of practical reasoning. Hence, there can be no adequate theory of ethics apart from a theory of (practical) rationality. \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0       8.    There seems to be a division between practical reasons and evidential reasons, between reasoning and practicing. But there is none. 7. Practical reason is both practical and rational. The reason it does not automatically seem so is that we falsely divide practice from reason and reason from practice. But why? \uc0\u8232 \
\
\
      9.     There seems to be a division between motivations (which are not normative) and practical reasons (which are normative). Practical reasons are facts taken as reasons for acting or abstaining from action, judgments about what is to be done and what is to be avoided. Practical reasons are objective features of the world taken as reasons, just as evidential reasons are. It is only the presumed division between non-normative motives and normative motives that allows for expressivism about moral reasons (but not evidential reasons). Naturalism seems to require it. I've already shown how naturalism does not require it. Hence, there is good reason to presume (defeasibly) that practical reasoning is an objective, rational process. There is no motivation to be expressivistic about practical reasoning. \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Anti-realism broadly construed comes in a variety of forms: non-cognitivist subjectivism, cognitivist subjectivism, constructivism, and so on. What each of these quite disparate views share in common is a denial of robust realism. Jay Wallace explains such realism as follows: \
\
>The basic commitment of realism in this domain is the idea that there are facts of the matter about what we have reason to do that are prior to and independent of our deliberations, to which those deliberations are ultimately answerable. Realists picture practical reason as a capacity for reflection about an objective body of normative truths regarding action.[@seppracticalreason, section 2. Wallace cites Parfit (2011) and Scanlon (2014).]\
\
Pretty clearly, I have been assuming a kind of realism. Such an assumption is not viciously circular. Realism about practical reasons is what Nagel calls a "defeasible presumption."[@nagel1989view 143.] That is, most of us have no pre-analytic objection to the seeming fact that some reasons for acting are good reasons, and others bad. Some brute norms (is wrong torture animals, or that one is not to use ineffective means to achieve one's ends) have a quasi-analytic force to them. \
\
Even anti-realism's most sophisticated advocates concede the that realism is the default view. For example, John Mackie admits that "the main tradition of European moral philosophy\'94 accepts objective values. He even admits that moral thought and language assumes it: the notion of objective value has  \'93a firm basis in ordinary thought, and even in the meanings of moral terms."[^54] Alan Gibbard likewise says, "Normative language does involve claims to objectivity in some sense\'97that seems clear enough."[@gibbard1992wise 154] Gibbard goes so far as to say that Platonism about reasons is common sense.[^53]\
\
[^54]: Compare with @cuneo2014speech. \
\
[^53]: "It might be thought that ordinary conceptions of rationality are Platonistic or intuitionistic. On the Platonistic picture, among the facts of the world are facts of what is rational and what is not. A person of normal mental powers can discern these facts. Judgments of rationality are thus straightforward apprehensions of fact, not through sense perception but through a mental faculty analogous to sense perception. When a person claims authority to pronounce on what is rational, he must base his claim on this power of apprehension." \
\
Nevertheless, subjectivism has a serious challenge to the presumptive.  Subjectivism is motivated by considering a problem about the status of practical reasons within (a broadly-construed) naturalism. As Simon Blackburn summarizes, naturalism asks:\
\
>... No more of the world than we already know is there\'97the ordinary features of things on the basis of which we make decisions about them, like or dislike them, fear them and avoid them, desire them and seek them out. It asks no more than this: a natural world, and patterns of reaction to it.[@blackburn1985spreading] \
\
One currently popular approach is non-cognitivist (or non-descriptivist) expressivism: \
\
>Expressivism in this form suggests a naturalistic interpretation of practical reason, one that may seem appropriate to the enlightened commitments of the modern scientific world view. It is naturalistic metaphysically, insofar as it makes no commitment to the objective existence in the world of such allegedly questionable entities as values, norms, or reasons for action.[@seppracticalreason]\
\
Expressivism's biggest proponent argues along the same lines as Blackburn, that, "Nothing in a plausible, naturalistic picture of our place in the universe requires ...  non-natural facts and these powers of non-sensory apprehension"[@gibbard1992wise 154] \
\
#### Hence, the neo-Aristotelian account of practical reason I have been developing needs to show if practical reasons can be mind-independently real, and if they are real, how they can be natural. To that task we now turn. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 There is a large and complex body of literature on moral motivation, especially the debate between internalism and externalism. I would like to briefly situate the neo-Aristotelian account in this debate. \
\
The motivational internalist argues that any practical reasons "out there" that are practical reasons *for me* necessarily connect up with my motivational structure.[@williams2007internal] Internalism seems to allow that the amoralist who is *not motivated* to be moral is off the hook. The externalist, by contrast, argues that there might be practical reasons "out there" such that I *ought* to be motivated by them, even if I am currently not. The immoralist has *reasons* to \uc0\u966  even if he or she has no (current) *motivation* to \u966 . \
\
On my view, what motivational internalism gets right is the affirmation that one necessarily acts on what one judges is the thing to do. Defined widely enough, I can agree to this way of stating things. If by "my motivational structure" we simply mean *my overall practical disposition toward the worthwhile, desirable, and good*, then it is quite uncontroversial to assert that one only goes in for \uc0\u966 -ing when \u966 -ing seems to be worthwhile, for I argued with Aquinas that to be a practical agent just means to be oriented to pursue good things, and avoid bad things. Whatever may appear to me to fall under the description of 'good' I will, ipso facto, be oriented toward (whether I pursue it or merely approve of it and admire it). Whatever may appear to me to fall under the description 'bad' I will, ipso facto, oriented away from it (whether I avoid it or merely disapprove of it). \
\
That said, what motivational externalism gets right, that there are reasons "out there" that *would* motivate one if one knew about them. There might be reasons to \uc0\u966  that I am not aware of and (hence) am not motivated by. For example, perhaps it is true that one ought to save for retirement, but I may fail to do so because I am unaware of that reason or am ignoring it in my attention to other reasons. \
\
It seems to me that much of the debate over the question of whether reasons "out there" can or cannot motivate one turns on a fatal ambiguity in the phrase 'moral reasons.'  *Any* practical reason (i.e., objective normative and evaluative facts about what is worth pursuing and worth avoiding) can be seen as a "moral reason." \
\
A safer and clearer strategy is to avoid this terminological mess altogether and recapture the simple insight that any *reason to \uc0\u966 * is a practical reason that can feature in an overall account of *what to do, all things considered*. The practically wise person and the virtuous person is the one who does what should be done, all things considered. While it often happens that one's individual practical reasons conflict, nevertheless, a set of practical reasons can constitute the *overriding* practical reason: *the thing to do*, all things considered. So, the final or verdictive ought belongs only to the ought that is the conclusion of the total process of practical reasoning. \
\
Seen in this light, it is obvious that on my neo-Aristotelian account practical reasons can and do motivate us. Seen in this light, practical reasons *are the only thing that motivate*. Practical reasons are the *primary* meaning of the term 'motive.' Other psychological states such as hungers, thirsts, loves, fears, *move* me to action the same way that such states move non-rational organisms. For rational animals, only reasons *motivate* me to act, since motivation is (I argue) a fundamentally rational state.  Aquinas distinguishes between the "actions of a human" and "human actions." The action of a human is any motion, such as mumbling in your sleep, scratching an itch, or idly tapping a foot. But a human action is by definition an action in pursuit of a goal which is perceived as a good. A human being without any practical reasons would not do immoral deeds; he or she would not do anything at all. Like Melville's Bartleby the Scrivener, the person who does not engage in practical reasoning or identify any practical reasons would simply waste away and die.[@melville1966bartleby] \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
      10.   To return to McDowell: There seems to be a division between overriding "verdictive" reasons and non-overriding reasons. But there is none the final, overriding verdictive reason is simply the thing to do, all things considered, for oneself, and others, and the world. \uc0\u8232 \
      11.   An objection: Saying that everyone pursues the good according to their own conception thereof does not define away immorality; it makes moral mistakes judgment mistakes.\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 ### What About Immorality? \
\
Some might object that this view of practical reason as a process that is oriented by definition at the apparent good defines away the possibility of immorality. Does "aiming at the good" exculpate an agent's apparently immoral motives or ends? Not at all. Yet the objection requires an important clarification. First, if the immoral person *acts at all* then, according to the argument, he or she must be pursuing some apparent good by definition. To be practical rational necessarily means to pursue something *as good*, as desirable. Secondly, if the immoral person acts wrongly, then he or she has misjudged the good. On the neo-Aristotelian view I am developing, immoral acts are rational mistakes. Just as an epistemic agent might hold a false belief p without affirming the false *as false*, a practical agent might pursue a bad thing without pursuing it *as bad*.  Rather, the immoral person fails in their practical reasoning to correctly rank and order specific goods. The imprudent person, for example, judges that it would be better to eat, drink, and be merry today rather than plan to avoid future ills. The cruel person judges that it would be better to cause suffering than to be kind. \
\
In summary, to be a practical, rational animal is to have the capacity for *rational action*. Rational action is not simply motion or pursuit of some good -- even insects and fungi do that. Rational action is the inclination to pursue or avoid in accordance with one's judgments about what is good or bad, desirable or undesirable. Practical reasoning is a very broad term to encompass a range of activities by which we form a plan for how to live -- including processes by which we identify, assess, collate, and rank various practical reasons in favor of and against possible actions or ways of life. \
\
The upshot of these reflections is this: If a person does anything at all, then that person is engaging in practical reasoning. The "final verdict" and the verdictive ought is simply what Foot calls the thing to do "all things considered."[@foot2001natural 57] Apparent counterexamples that one might furnish to disprove the point actually serve, with sufficient clarification, to reinforce it. For example, someone might say, 'It's ridiculous to think that I always pursue the good, because I sometimes do wrong.' Sometimes we do the wrong thing. The proper response is that we perceive the bad as the good. Someone might say, "But sometimes I perceive the bad *as bad* and pursue it anyway." The response is that we sometimes take a bad or dismotivating reason into an overall reason to do something, all things considered.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \uc0\u8232 \
      12.   A foolish person -- the habitually, incorrigibly foolish person responsible for his or her own folly -- \'a0is, ipso facto, a bad practical primate. \uc0\u8232 \
      13.   The virtuous person increases in practical wisdom. \uc0\u8232 }