{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
## Introduction: Virtue and Reason\
\
How should one live? If there is to be a good answer -- or a set of good answers -- to this question, then there must be *reasons to live this way rather than that.* There must be some general conception of a good life and its opposite which becomes for us a reason to live the way we do. How do people come to a judgment of what bad lives are, and what the good lives are (or what one of the good lives is)? The answer can only be through practically reasoning.^[As a matter of fact, it is obvious that most of us come to some conception of a good life -- initially at least -- by observing exemplars whom we take to be successful people. I mean exemplars such as parents, mentors, historical figures, saints, or heroes.  If one is to confirm that one's exemplars are actually living a good life, however, one must test the initially appealing exemplar against sound reason. ]\
\
The theme of this chapter is practical reasoning. My account of human nature and human virtue has thus far depended quite a bit on intuitive notions about the nature of practical reasoning. Hence, the purpose of this chapter is to make explicit the relation between practical reasoning and virtue ethics in the neo-Aristotelian conception thereof. In this chapter, I attempt to explain the inherent *normativity* of practical reasoning; in the next chapter, I attempt to explain the *naturalism* of practical reasoning. \
\
There is a popular conception according to which moral reasoning is about the morally good and bad while practical reasoning is about something else entirely, such as the prudent or imprudent, the advisable or ill-advised. On my view, this conception is mistaken. \
\
I suggested above that the picture of a "virtue triangle" is useful illustration for the notion that human nature and teleology cannot be disentangled from practical reasoning. Put succinctly, human nature is to be practical reasoners; virtue is excellent practical reasoning and rational practice; and the human telos is to become practically wise. To sum up again the relation of the whole, I have argued in chapter 2 that at least the biological parts of nature are normative. In chapter 3, I argued that human nature is normative -- specifically, I defended the view that our life form is to be practical, rational animals. In that chapter, I briefly introduced the concept of practical reason to explain what behaviors and capacities distinguish our species from others, according to both the perspective of common sense and scientific reflection. In chapter 4, I argued that virtues are those qualities that constitute a human life, and so the person who has them is expressing the general form of life that is desirable for any and all human beings. The goal of acquiring virtues is to live a distinctively human life according to the normative conception of human nature as practical rational primates. Hence, in this chapter we must examine the precise nature of *practical reasoning* as it is operative in neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism. \
\
The first step of my approach to treating the theme of practical reason is simply to ask: how should one live? The question is one of central importance for neo-Aristotelian writers such as Bernard Williams, John McDowell, MacIntyre, Foot, and Hursthouse. The question is central for good reason; it calls for a *practical* and *ethical* answer that gives good reason to live a good life. The question also calls for an *informed* answer that is sensitive to the facts of human nature. Answering the question requires engaging in practical reasoning (the process) in order to furnish practical reasons (the products).\
\
Hence, our task is to offer an account of practical reason that shows how the virtuous person asks and answers the question of how to live. \
\
In section 2, I explain the puzzle of practical reason: is practical reasoning -- i.e., is it practical or rational or both? Can practical reasoning motivate one without the presence of other psychological states such as desires, inclinations, instincts, or prior commitments? I then outline my solution, which I call the "thinking how to live" solution. On this solution, thinking how to live is intrinsically practical and rational. \
\
In section 3, I explore in detail John McDowell's view of practical reason and offer a substantive criticism. McDowell is correct that virtue is a practical, rational disposition but he confuses the "sensitivity to what a situation requires" with *virtue* in general. To remedy his account requires a fresh re-thinking of practical reasons. \
\
In section 4, I re-think the distinction between moral reasons and practical reasons. I argue that 'practical reasoning' is best contrasted against theoretical reasoning rather than 'moral reasoning.' For practical reasons, most broadly construed, encompass both 'self-regarding' and 'other-regarding' reasons. Furthermore, I argue that practical reasoning aims at the apparent good; that to be a practical agent who acts at all means that one is oriented toward the good, the to-be-pursued, the desirable. I also suggest that the neo-Aristotelian account of practical reason resolves a dispute about moral motivation. \
\
In section 5, I address three challenges. Does this view of practical reason beg the question against "procedural" accounts in favor of a "substantive" account? Does it define away the possibility of immorality? And does it of practical reason beg the question against subjectivism in favor of realism about practical reasons? I answer that a substantive view of practical reasoning (the process) and realist or at least inter-subjectivist view about practical reasons is more plausible than both of these rivals both on independent grounds and also in light of the foregoing account. }