{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
## The Problem of Practice and Reason\
\
Consider the following apparent problem: If "practical reason" is really practical, then how is it rational? Or if it is rational, how is it really practical? \
\
A view familiarly attributed to Hume says that practical reasons cannot motivate, at least not by themselves.^[He says: "Reason is the discovery of truth and falsehood."] If this were so, moral reasons could not satisfy the "practical requirement." Moral reasons could not be actionable. \
\
Expressivists are among the chief contemporary proponents of this view. Indeed, the very motivation for expressivism, in large part, is the need to satisfy the *practical* dimension of practical reason (at the cost of the "rational" part). Jay Wallace explains: \
\
>Expressivism in this form suggests a naturalistic interpretation of practical reason, one that may seem appropriate to the enlightened commitments of the modern scientific world view. It is naturalistic metaphysically, insofar as it makes no commitment to the objective existence in the world of such allegedly questionable entities as values, norms, or reasons for action.[@seppracticalreason]\
\
On this familiar view, \'93cognition and volition are distinct.\'94 Practical reasoners do not simply enjoy  a \'93single complex sensitivity\'94 to what situations require; they also need the presence of a conative mental state (such as a desire, interest, or attraction) as well. The cognitive state provides the judgment of the object as desirable, while  the conative state provides the movement toward the object. If the conative or volitional or motivational aspect of one's practice is distinct from the cognitive or intellectual or rational aspect, then how can there even a unitive activity such as practical reasoning? The very notion of practical reason seems to be a paradox. \
\
There are two sides to this paradox. On the one side, if we define practical reasoning as a process that results in a kind of knowledge, then all it can do is grasp what is true. Knowledge is is "theoretical" or "speculative" or "contemplative". (Affirming the proposition, *The complete works of Plato is lying on the table* does not lead one to read Plato without some intervening motivational state, such as *I've been wanting to read Plato for awhile but could not find my complete works.*) So the first problem is that theoretical knowledge cannot (by itself) motivate to action, and practical reasoning results in such knowledge, so practical reasoning cannot motivate to action. It cannot be *practical*.\
\
On the other side, if we define practical reasoning as a process that results in a kind of action or at least a motivation to act, then it does not seem to be able to grasp what is true. \
\
We all exhibit various dispositions to act in certain ways, to rank and organize our various motivations, to pursue certain things, or to make certain decisions rather than others. Such dispositions are clearly practical. They have the right kind of action-guiding force to explain why we act the way we do. But is a "disposition" a form of knowledge? The term  'disposition' gets used in various ways: one can be disposed (say) to repay one's debts (a moral commitment), or disposed to shout when angry (a temperament), or disposed to travel abroad every summer (an interest).\
\
So, according to this paradoxical way of viewing things, either practical reasoning is not *practical* (action-guiding) or it is not *reasonable* (grasping truth and false). If "practical reason" is the name for a single capacity that is both cognitive and volitional, then in a very real sense, the challenge is to *defend the concept of practical reason itself*. \
}