{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
### Practical Reasoning as Willing the Good\
\
The first point in this case is that all organisms act toward ends, albeit without reflection.  Frey summarizes Aquinas in this way: \
\
>All living things are a self-sustaining system of powers that functions to bring the living thing into being and to sustain its being. The movement of any part of a living thing, at any particular moment, is necessarily explained by reference to the movement of the whole thing towards a single end: the coming to be, maintenance, or reproduction of that very form of life.[@frey 68] \
\
We have argued above that the growth into maturity of an organism is growth into the exemplification of its form of life. This form of life is what Aquinas calls a thing's nature. Hence, a wolf hunts in packs by nature, trees extend roots into the ground by nature, reptiles warm themselves in the sun by nature, and so on. \
\
In plants and animals, the "natural inclination" toward their good is not reflective or intentional, and Aquinas did not make this mistake. Frey says:"Aquinas would agree with us that it is a category mistake to say that a sunflower wants to grow towards the light, if by this we mean that the flower somehow registers a positive feeling or has an inner impression towards the light, which \'93causes\'94 it to move toward the light. The plant does not apprehend or desire anything; thus Aquinas is very careful to say that it does not have a power of appetite. In fact, Aquinas is at pains to note that a plant has no window onto the world at all\'97it just has conditions in which it characteristically comes into being, maintains, and reproduces itself.[@frey 69-70]\
\
Plants merely grow and reproduce; while animals grow, reproduce, and enjoy conscious experiences, such as sensory perceptions of material objects and of their own hungers, thirsts, pains, and so on. When it comes to human beings, however, we observe a difference. Human beings grow, reproduce, and enjoy conscious experiences like other animals but human beings also *know* that they do so. To quote John Haldane again,  "things are specified by their power."[@haldane1998return 262] And we observe our "power" or capacity to engage in cognitive and deliberative activities. Simply put, we are able to reason, to reason theoretically and practically.\
\
Practical reasoning is the distinctly human activity. While animals can not only sense but *perceive*, humans have the capacity of "intellection," the power of abstracting the forms themselves from percepts. An animal can *sense* an informed, organized object; an animal can be affected by the object. But the human animal can *acquire information* from the organized object. The ability to perceive something *as*, or even to perceive something big and brown with a smudge on its nose, does not imply the ability to perceive that thing as a cat.[@haldane1996coming]\
\
When it comes to inclination or "appetite", animals pursue and avoid objects. The antelope pursues healthy grass and flees a lion. The animal can only experience what is good or bad for it as a particular object. Animals incline toward their own good. They also have sensory perception of beings. But animals do not perceive beings *as* falling under universal categories. \
 \
By contrast, a human being can recognize universals and hence can take up its natural inclinations to pursue or flee as reasons in a deliberative act. The natural inclinations may be underwritten or overridden. Confronted with a bit of healthy food on someone else's plat, I may choose not to eat it, for I recognize it as *not mine*. Confronted with a lion in a zoo, I may choose not to flee, for I recognize it as *not dangerous*. \
\
Frey summarizes: \
\
>Rational animals, like any animal, have a natural inclination towards their good as a whole, and like lower animals this power is actualized through their apprehension of things in the world. But Aquinas argues that a rational animal relates to the world through the application of universal concepts, and thus it is inclined to pursue or avoid things under an intellectual, universal apprehension of them. Thus, Aquinas says that the will is inclined towards its objects under the formality of the \'93universal good,\'94 rather than the particular good.[@frey 75]\
\
We have been speaking of the human capacity for recognizing and pursuing particular ends as good. We need to expand our scope to include the whole of life, the conception of our human good that constitutes the answer to the question "how should one live?" McDowell gets this part right \'97 every rational practice is undertaking in pursuit of some particular end *in context* of a total conception of what is good in general. Frey says: \
\
>Consequently, we can say that rational animals have an understanding of different levels of ends, and at least a vague sense of how they are supposed to hang together as a whole. This conception of how it all hangs together is what Aquinas calls the ultimate end -- a rational animal\'92s general, conceptual understanding of how to live or go on. Aquinas thinks that any sane, mature adult will necessarily have cobbled together some such conception. Aquinas calls this conception \'93the universal good\'94, and he argues that it is the will\'92s proper object. Everything that is willed is willed under this rational aspect of good, as to be pursued because *in accord with my general conception of the good.* In fact, Aquinas thinks there could be no reasons unless a rational animal has a general conception of its own good, and thus a general sense of how to live. [@frey 78-9, italics in original.]\
\
Frey's argument here is that the question of 'how to live' is a question about my good as a human being; answering that question requires practically reasoning, which is a distinctively human activity. And since every "sane, mature adult" engages in this activity, every sane mature adult has a general notion about the answer. Without it, one would not act at all. Frey points out: \
\
>no human action is intelligible without attributing to the agent herself some conception of this end, no matter how inarticulate, unsystematic, or unreflective it might be. Aquinas takes it for granted that in coming to be a human being\'97i.e., being raised in a community of other human beings, coming into the possession of concepts, a language, and coming to have a world\'97one comes into some such conception, and thus comes to act voluntarily.[@frey 87] \
\
Every practical rational primate of sufficient age and maturity has some conception of their own human good which is, if you like, the ultimate practical reason answering the question of how to live. That is not to deny, that the answer arises in part due to the normal process of socialization. Rather, that our conception of how to live would arise that way is what we would predict for rational primates who speak and live in society. \
\
Comparing with theoretical reasoning: to be rational is to judge a proposition p as true or false, as best one can, in accord with the rational assessment of the reasons for affirming or denying p. Similarly, to be practically rationally is to judge a practical reason \uc0\u966  as good or bad, in accord with the rational assessment of the reasons for pursuing or avoiding \u966 . \
\
Aquinas points out that the first thing rational beings apprehend is simply "existence" or "being" -- infants perceive that some things are there and others not there. They eventually come to perceive objects *as* objects, as individual objects, and to name and categorize them with language acquired in a social setting.  Likewise, the *practical rational* animal first apprehends simply "good" or "desirable" \'97 infants perceive that some things are to be pursued and others avoided. Aquinas says:\
\
>Now as "being" is the first thing that falls under the apprehension simply, so "good" is the first thing that falls under the apprehension of the practical reason, which is directed to action: since every agent acts for an end under the aspect of good. Consequently the first principle of practical reason is one founded on the notion of good, viz. that "good is that which all things seek after." Hence this is the first precept of practical reason, that "good is to be done and pursued, and evil is to be avoided."[@aquinas IIa. Q.94. Art. 2]\
\
The use of 'good' here, it bears repeating, not a special moral sense of good, but simply means 'desirable'. Good means 'to be pursued.' An entity is 'good' when it is considered as an object of inclination. Without such a general principle, practical reasoning and rational practice are unintelligible. \
\
}