{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl400
\ls1\ilvl0
\b\fs30 \cf2 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  There can be no adequate theory of ethics without a theory of practical rationality. The reason it does not automatically seem so is that we artificially divide "practical reasoning" which is about prudential or self-regarding concerns from "moral reasoning" which is about moral or other-regarding concerns. I must show the genuinely moral significance of practical reasoning for ethical living. \'a0Practical reasoning helps us to answer the question, "How should one live?" The question presumes a distinction between how one *should* live and how one in fact *does* live or how one *might* live -- perhaps how we might be inclined by our baser nature to food, drink, sexual pleasure, and comfort. There seems to be a division between moral and prudential reasons. Moral reasons help us resolve dilemmas, prudential reasons help us form long-term life plans. This corresponds to Pincoff's distinctions: "character ethics" is all about one's character and life, as opposed to "quandary ethics", which is about resolving moral dilemmas. \'a0This is the familiar frame, but it is a mistake. \uc0\u8232 \
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	2.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 McDowell: Virtue is knowledge. It is a practical form of knowledge. Practical knowledge is not codifiable; but it is still knowledge. Not even evidential knowledge is codifiable. But it explains why we act. \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\tx560\pardeftab720\sl400
\cf2 \
\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl400
\ls2\ilvl0\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Practical reasons motivate. \uc0\u8232 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	2.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 McDowell leaves two things to be desired: What is the relationship between the kind of moral reasoning that virtue is and broader, practical reasoning? Is the broader sort of practical reasoning, morally praiseworthy or not? If so, then is all intellectual virtue moral virtue? \uc0\u8232 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	3.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 My alternative begins with a re-envisioning of practical reasoning as moving toward the good by identifying it as good, and moving away from the bad by identifying it as bad.\uc0\u8232 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	4.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 All living things seek their own natural good. Human beings do so rationally. \uc0\u8232 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	5.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Practical reasoning is a process of identifying, weighing, ranking, and assembling practical reasons. There seems to be a division between procedural reasoning (assigning means to ends) and evaluative reasoning (picking or evaluating ends). But there is none. "There could be no reasons at all unless a rational animal has a general conception of its own good, and thus a general sense of how to live." In other words, all specific practical reasons about what to do are hooked into the general practical reason, namely a judgment about what is good or desirable. This is an orientation toward the good that all practical reasoners share.\uc0\u8232 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	6.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 More specific than a general conception of the good, but less specific than particular maxims, are conceptions of basic goods such as knowledge, friendship, beauty, health, and so on. This is an orientation toward basic goods. Errors about basic goods are comparatively more devestating to the moral life than errors about more specific applications of good and bad.\uc0\u8232 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	7.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The familiar division between moral and prudential practical reasons is not very old (about as old as Mill) and foreign to the Greek and neo-Aristotelian way of thinking. Instead, all practical reasons are "moral" reasons (in the sense that they are value judgments about what is to be done); and only some practical reasons are "moral" reasons in the sense that they are about what is good or bad pertaining to others. \uc0\u8232 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	8.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 There seems to be a division between practical reasons and evidential reasons, between reasoning and practicing. But there is none. 7. Practical reason is both practical and rational. The reason it does not automatically seem so is that we falsely divide practice from reason and reason from practice. But why? \uc0\u8232 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	9.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  There seems to be a division between motivations (which are not normative) and practical reasons (which are normative). Practical reasons are facts taken as reasons for acting or abstaining from action, judgments about what is to be done and what is to be avoided. Practical reasons are objective features of the world taken as reasons, just as evidential reasons are. It is only the presumed division between non-normative motives and normative motives that allows for expressivism about moral reasons (but not evidential reasons). Naturalism seems to require it. I've already shown how naturalism does not require it. Hence, there is good reason to presume (defeasibly) that practical reasoning is an objective, rational process. There is no motivation to be expressivistic about practical reasoning. \uc0\u8232 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	10.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 To return to McDowell: There seems to be a division between overriding "verdictive" reasons and non-overriding reasons. But there is none the final, overriding verdictive reason is simply the thing to do, all things considered, for oneself, and others, and the world. \uc0\u8232 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	11.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 An objection: Saying that everyone pursues the good according to their own conception thereof does not define away immorality; it makes moral mistakes judgment mistakes.\uc0\u8232 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	12.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 A foolish person -- the habitually, incorrigibly foolish person responsible for his or her own folly -- \'a0is, ipso facto, a bad practical primate. \uc0\u8232 \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	13.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The virtuous person increases in practical wisdom. \uc0\u8232 \
}