{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
My alternative is this: there is only one kind of reason for action: practical reasons. And though there are distinctions between various kinds of practical reasons, the proper distinction is not between "moral" and "non-moral" or "prudential" ones. Certainly considerations about myself are conceptually distinct from considerations about my family, my friend, my society, or my species. And certainly there is a powerful social and psychological force to the \
\
 But getting the distinction right is crucial to understanding the kind of knowledge that virtue is. \
\
The proper distinction, as Foot points out, is that some practical reasons have to do with "obligations, duties, and charitable acts" to others while some practical reasons have to do with obligations to oneself or to third-person objects such as the environment or abstract objects. \
\
MacIntyre can help to articulate this insight. His earliest ethical work distinguished the significance of moral judgments compared to other kinds of judgments. In a careful critique of both intuitionists such as Moore and emotivists such as Stevenson, MacIntyre concluded that both (mistakenly) assume that moral judgments and moral terms have significance only in their referential meaning. The intuitionists, of course, concluded that moral terms refer to a non-natural property, while the emotivists concluded that moral terms do not refer to such a property and so do not refer at all. (Naturalists, later in the 20th century, argue that moral terms refer to natural properties.) MacIntyre\'92s alternative denies the assumption entirely; moral judgments \'93have their own kind of logic\'94 and their importance comes from \'93exhibiting the logic of their usage.\'94^[@murphy2003macintyre 118, quoting p. 73 of MacIntyre\'92s master\'92s thesis *The Significance of Moral Judgments*.] The significance of moral judgments is that \'93they enable us to solve problems of appraisal and of action.\'94 Solving problems of evaluation (we might say) and action is their place in \'93a pattern of language and action\'85\'94 He continues: \
\
>Above all they arise out of the way in which we see the world and the way in which our language allows us to see the world. We cannot sufficiently emphasize the direction given to our appraisals by the language which happens to be available for our descriptions. It is as we see the facts that we judge the world.[@murphy2003macintyre]\
\
What MacIntyre would have us see here is that evaluative judgments are not *simply* useful in moral dilemmas or quandaries. Rather, evaluative judgments appear at the earliest stages of childhood development in a pattern of usage that is inextricable from the human activities of reasoning, acting, and appraising. They occur in the widest imaginable spread of human activities, from politics to playgrounds, from sociology to social life, from the practices of law and medicine to the professions of journalism and psychology, from the sciences to the arts. Even if this point be granted, moral dilemmas are not *unreal*. Moral dilemmas are a special version of our general \'93problems of appraisal and action.\'94 They may be particularly vexing, but they are no different from the general problems of how to live, how to be happy, what kinds of public policies to pursue, what apparently meaningful types of life are really meaningful. \
\
We can state the picture in this way: evaluative judgments are the product of a process of evaluative reasoning. Evaluative reasoning is *about* evaluative features of the world, even though evaluative reasoning simultaneously colors our appraisal of the world. \
\
In my reading, MacIntyre's insight about evaluative reasoning and "moral judgments" is identical to my thesis that practical reasoning and practical judgments are not narrowly "moral" if by "moral" we mean only that which has to do with other-regarding duties. Instead of segregating "moral" judgments from a broader class of practical judgments, we ought to view all practical judgments together. Instead of puzzling over the illusory problem of how a special class of moral judgments function, we should simply reflect on the whole class of practical judgments that explain *why we act at all.*\
\
\
\
----\
\
As a young philosopher, MacIntyre was troubled about emotivism in particular and modern metaethics in general. Emotivists, intuitionists, naturalists, and error theorists all seemed to assume that moral terms are *referential.* If moral terms within moral judgments are supposed to pick out a property in the world, then either we must identify that property or (if we cannot) conclude that moral terms are literally meaningless. He argued that this assumption is a mistake. Instead, he concluded that the significance of moral judgments is that \'93they enable us to solve problems of appraisal and of action.\'94[@murphy2003macintyre 118, quoting MacIntyre\'92s master\'92s thesis *The Significance of Moral Judgments* p. 73] Instead of referring (or failing to refer) to a special 'moral property', all evaluative reasoning is practical reasoning. We employ moral judgments when we must evaluate something or when we must reason about what to do. Moral reasoning is not a special, mystical discipline divorced from prudential, instrumental, and other kinds of practical reasoning. Hence, there can be no adequate theory of ethics apart from a theory of practical rationality. \
\
\
Seen in this light, it is obvious that on my neo-Aristotelian account practical reasons can and do motivate us. Seen in this light, practical reasons *are the only thing that motivate*. Practical reasons are the *primary* meaning of the term 'motive.' Other psychological states such as hungers, thirsts, loves, fears, *move* me to action the same way that such states move non-rational organisms. For rational animals, only reasons *motivate* me to act, since motivation is (I argue) a fundamentally rational state.  Aquinas distinguishes between the "actions of a human" and "human actions." The action of a human is any motion, such as mumbling in your sleep, scratching an itch, or idly tapping a foot. But a human action is by definition an action in pursuit of a goal which is perceived as a good. A human being without any practical reasons would not do immoral deeds; he or she would not do anything at all. Like Melville's Bartleby the Scrivener, the person who does not engage in practical reasoning or identify any practical reasons would simply waste away and die.[@melville1966bartleby] \
\
\
Speaking of Foot's theory, Julia Annas says: \
\
>What is so helpful for ethics from this kind of biological naturalism is that we find that the normativity of our ethical discourse is not something which emerges mysteriously with humans and can only be projected back, in an anthropomorphic way, onto trees and their roots. Rather, we find normativity in the realm of living things, plants and animals, already. It is part of the great merit of the work of Philippa Foot and Rosalind Hursthouse to have stressed this point. Like many important philosophical points, it is obvious once pointed out...[@annas2005naturalism 13] \
\
\
\
\
\
With this terminological and conceptual confusion resolved, let us return to McDowell's response to the Humean critic who is not satisfied that moral reasons are intrinsically motivating. \
\
McDowell admitted that the virtuous person is not just sensitive to one or two sorts of requirement for action as final verdicts; the virtuous person is sensitive to *the broad range of practical reasons*. This admission was correct, in my view.  The virtuous person is sensitive to *often competing reasons.* These must be therefore ranked and weighed before a final, verdictive reason emerges. \
\
However, this verdictive reason is *the thing to do*, all things considered -- including the consideration of "non-moral" reasons. McDowell is incorrect to persist in labeling the broader sensitivity as "virtue." Calling this sensitivity to a broad range of (even prudential) reasons 'virtue' suggests that one is only considering "moral reasons" in the narrower sense of that term. This subtle mistake leaves McDowell's case open to the hypothetical counterexample that an immoral person might be sensitive to a wide range of reasons, including narrowly "moral" reasons (read as one's duty to others), while doing the wrong thing or doing nothing at all. \
\
The point about this tangled relationship between practical reasons and moral reasons is not merely of historical or etymological interest (though of course, the narrow sense of the word 'moral' in discourse today is clear enough). The point is that  qualities such as benevolence and generosity we tend to call human \'93moral goodness\'94 are of a type with a *broader category of goodness*.  Foot explains: \'93I want to show that judgments usually considered to be the special subject of moral philosophy should really be seen as belonging to a wider class of evaluations of conduct with which they share a common conceptual structure.\'94 [@foot2001natural 66-67] \
\
\
The point about this tangled relationship between practical reasons and moral reasons is not merely of historical or etymological interest (though of course, the narrow sense of the word 'moral' in discourse today is clear enough). The point is that  qualities such as benevolence and generosity we tend to call human \'93moral goodness\'94 are of a type with a *broader category of goodness*.  Foot explains: \'93I want to show that judgments usually considered to be the special subject of moral philosophy should really be seen as belonging to a wider class of evaluations of conduct with which they share a common conceptual structure.\'94 [@foot2001natural 66-67] \
\
What are commonly called "prudential reasons" are one type of practical reason, one example of *the thing to do*; what are commonly called "moral reasons" are another type of practical reason. Both are practical reasons whose proper domain is the rational process of practical reasoning. I accept a *distinction* between various kinds of practical reasons, but the distinction is \
\
}