{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Section 2 breaks ground on this complicated topic by exploring part of John McDowell's essay *Virtue and Reason*. I provide a qualified defense of McDowell's thesis that moral virtue is a form of practical knowledge that includes an initial, perceptual sensitivity to what practical responses a situation requires. \
\
Section 3 highlights an ambiguity in McDowell's account that confuses the genus (practical reasons in general) with the species (one type of practical reasons, namely "moral" reasons), and hence confuses virtue in general with practical wisdom in particular. I attempt to remedy McDowell's account by getting clear on what practical reasoning is. \
\
Section 4 reprises the argument that human beings are practical reasoning animals by placing our distinctive activity in context of the general inclination of all living things to their own life and health. In this light, practical reasoning is necessarily substantive reasoning about ends, rather than a merely instrumental one about means, because in order to have any reasons at all one must have a first principle of practical reason, namely, a general evaluative conception of what is to be pursued and hence how to live. By this definition, practical reasons can and do motivate (by themselves). Hence, practical reasoning is both practical and reasonable by definition. \
\
Section 5 gives a bit of historical context on the familiar frame that distinguishes moral from non-moral reasons and defends the older Greek frame. Although no one has copyright on these terms, I contrast the concept of 'practical reasoning' with two other concepts: theoretical or demonstrative reasoning and moral reasoning. Practical reasoning includes *any* evaluation of reasons to \uc0\u966  or not to \u966 . Prior to Mill such used to be called 'moral reasoning'. By contrast, many think of 'moral reasons' as only those that pertain to the needs and rights of others; I name these 'second-personal' practical reasons to distinguish them from 'first-' and 'third-personal' practical reasons. \
\
Section 6 returns to the challenges listed above and meets them. I also respond to the objection that this neo-Aristotelian account of practical reason defines away immorality. My response is that this account places vice and immorality in clearer relief as practical mistakes arising from evaluative mistakes. }