{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 ## Virtue Theory in general virtues and vices\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 To quote Philippa Foot, \'93virtues are, in some general way, beneficial.\'94 Virtues, like frankness or courage are habitual activities that benefit the possessor and the community of which the possessor is a member. \
\
Foot thinks it a weakness that Greek sense of arete and the Latin sense of virtues include non-moral excellence. Robert Adams thinks this a strength, since moral excellence (he argues) is a species of excellence per se.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Adams, 
\i Finite and Infinite Goods,
\i0  Chapter 3 \'93Well-Being and Excellence
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \
\
Practical wisdom was counted as a moral virtue by the ancients, while we see it as an intellectual virtue. Which is it? Wisdom is connected, according to Foot, with action or the will, namely \'93knowledge of how to act well\'94 in general matters such as friendship, marriage, parenting, and career, and knowledge of how to pick good ends. \'93Cleverness\'94 may be knowledge of how to coordinate efficient means to any end, but wisdom \'93presupposes good ends\'94 (5). A second part of wisdom, Foot thinks, has to do with the \'93curiously elusive\'94 that that \'93some pursuits are more worthwhile than others\'94 (6). Borderline cases are always liable to dispute. But someone who consistently values (say) worldly position over health and family relationships I judge to be foolish in that regard, and I assume most of my readers agree. \
\
Foot also argues for her version of Aristotle\'92s dictum that \'93virtues are about what is difficult for men\'94 (8). That is, for any given virtue (such as justice) there are temptations \'97 often strong temptations \'97 to do what is vicious (such as overweening desires for wealth or overweening fear of criticism). \
\
Foot considers one puzzle about virtue theory that gave Kant much trouble. If virtues are \'93correctives\'94 to tempting errors endemic to human nature (like the temptation to overindulge in the sensual), then is someone who struggles and works hard to do well more or less virtuous? Suppose a man does not steal when his circumstances practically beg him to steal: he can easily get away with it, no one will know, the thing he could steal will greatly benefit him and its loss will not greatly harm its owner, etc. He seems more virtuous because he overcame more in his pursuit of virtue; he seems less virtuous because he had to employ extrinsic motivation to get himself to do good. Kant concluded that actions done for other motives besides dutiful motives don\'92t have moral worth (Cf. Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, I). Foot charitably offers only one corrective to this conclusion: \'93Some actions are in accordance with virtue without requiring virtue for their performance, whereas others are both in accordance with virtue and such as to show possession of a virtue\'94 (13). An action done in accordance with virtue (like self-preservation) but that does not \'91display a virtue\'92 has little to no moral worth, because it arises out of natural self-love. But that same action, under different circumstances, may display virtue \'97 as when someone is strongly tempted to suicide but resists, preserves themselves, through courage and hope. Similarly, doing an action that one finds enjoyable (even if that action is philanthropic action) is in accord with virtue but becomes a truly virtuous action when it is done in the face of resistance. \
\
>Can virtues be used to bad ends? For example, can the villainous criminal persist in robbing a bank through his great courage? Since it is \'93good for a blind horse to be slow\'94 it would be worse in a sense for an avaricious man to be courageous. There seems to be some analytic contradiction in saying \'91courage makes him bad\'92. That trait that benefits him harms him. Should we give up the intuitive definition of virtues as bestowing benefits? What are the alternatives? Either courage is not a virtue or the bank robber\'92s action is not courageous. Foot considers that the power a virtue typically has may not \'93operate characteristically\'94 under certain circumstances. [@foot2003n 16-17]\
\
> In this example we were considering an action in which courage was not operating as a virtue, without suggesting that in that agent it generally failed to do so. But the latter is also a possibility. If someone is both wicked and foolhardy this may be the case with courage, and it is even easier to find examples of a general connexion with evil rather than good in the case of some other virtues. Suppose, for instance, that we think of someone who is over\uc0\u8208 industrious, or too ready to refuse pleasure, and this is characteristic of him rather than something we find on one particular occasion. In this case the virtue of industry, or the virtue of temperance, has a systematic connexion with defective action rather than good action; and it might be said in either case that the virtue did not operate as a virtue in this man. Just as we might say in a certain setting \'91P is not a poison here\'92 though P is a poison and P is here, so we might say that industriousness, or temperance, is not a virtue in some. Similarly in a man habitually given to wishful thinking, who clings to false hopes, hope does not operate as a virtue and we may say that it is not a virtue in him.}