{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Humanity and nature
\b0 \
The question of value\'92s relation to nature collapses into the question of humanity\'92s relation to (the rest of) nature. \
\

\b Humanize value, naturalize humanity
\b0 \
There seem to be two options. Reduce value to nature in one step, or reduce value to human nature, and assume human nature is already reduced to or definitionally part of nature. The latter is two steps: humanize value, naturalize humanity.\
Some ethical naturalists are content to relegate all value to humanity (all value thought and talk) and leave it at that. I do not think this kind of \'93naturalizing\'94 is in the spirit of naturalism. The spirit of naturalism, the underlying motivation of naturalists from Lucretius to Dewey to Quine and Putnam, is to quite simply match the unified manifold, the unbroken harmony, the single continuous spectrum of nature or all of existence with a unified body of knowledge, a single science or harmonious set of sciences, a continuous spectrum of human knowledge all gathered together in one place, like the many leaves of Sybil\'92s book. \
\
For this reason panpsychists are naturalists despite being sounding quite weird to physicalists.\
For this reason reductive materialists are naturalists despite denying much of what \'93experience\'94 or common sense suggests about the first-person perspective, about free will, about rational judgment and so on. \
For this reason also evolutionary naturalists or emergent naturalists ground all the special features of humans in the organizational complexity of our biology: Chemicals and elements, at a level of complexity and organization, become living matter. Brains, at an appropriate level of complexity and organization or structure, become conscious matter \'97 still more complex and organized, self-concious matter. And at that moment, nature has an \'93inside.\'94 Consciousness \'97 our consciousness \'97 is nature becoming aware of itself. \
\
\

\b Demystifying human nature
\b0 \
For neo-Aristotelians, while first values were radically discontinuous with \'93normal\'94 natural facts, now values are part and parcel of human nature, and that\'92s that. But this relegation ironically doesn\'92t naturalize value but \'93non-naturalizes\'94 humanity. It leaves humanity radically discontinuous with nature. \
\
Some try to naturalize values by just putting them all  (or discovering them all) within humans. Ultimately, I don't think this strategy works. \
\
In sort, \'93humanizing\'94 mysterious values doesn\'92t naturalize those values, it mystifies humans. It doesn't demystify values, it re-locates the mystery. If all these mysterious non-factual value thingies floating around with no apparent connection or meaning in the natural world are all somehow internal to human nature, and humans are natural, then all those values are natural, right? Yes, or human nature has just become non-natural. We used to have a "fact/value" split but now we have a "fact/human" split. \
\
To see how human rising values doesn't demystify values that actually makes humans mysterious, consider the cycle of euphemism. A phenomenon like human fecal matter is impolite to talk about. So we invent a euphemism like "feces." The euphemism works for referring to the same stuff without impoliteness for awhile. Then some kids get ahold of the term, realize what it means, and (having no taste) find it uproariously funny. They make enough jokes to *impolitisize* the polite term, shucking its dignified veneer. We invent another euphemism like "scat". To my knowledge, no one has yet turned "scat" into an exclamation expressing surprise or disapproval.  \
\
To his credit, McDowell sees the parity of epistemic and moral norms. He wants to subjectivize moral norms, so he accordingly subjectivizes epistemic norms. Virtue and reason are *both* transcendental idealized processes, intersubjective human processes, objective enough for our purposes and to explain the objective purport in our thinking, feeling, and acting, but subjective enough to respect the distinction between human nature ("second nature") and *nature* nature (primary nature). \
\
Even so, second nature remains radically discontinuous from primary nature. Others, like Stephen Brown, not to be deterred want to naturalize human nature too. \
\
To preserve continuity, 
\i either 
\i0 humanity must be seen to be just as value-free as McDowell\'92s \'93bald nature,\'94 or nature must be seen to be just as value-laden as human nature. I take the later course. \
\
I put the dilemma simply (for brevity if not for clarity) here:  \
\
1. Human nature is continuous with nature. (Naturalism thesis)\
2. Either nature as a whole is normative (normativity is natural) or humans are not normative (not ethical, value-laden, enchanted) (Normativity dilemma).\
3. Humans are ethical by definition \'97 we cannot but engage in normative discourse, thought, and action. (Moral realism thesis).\
4. Nature is ethical, value-laden, enchanted, etc. (conclusion\
\
Either nature is normative or normativity is \'93merely\'94 natural. That is, normativity in general is different from factuality. Factuality is \'93natural\'94 and so normativity is, by contrast, not like that \'97 presumably 
\i not 
\i0 natural. So it either doesn\'92t exist or is reducible to nature. \
\
Now for some, to stomach a re-enchanted nature is too much. I shall challenge that squeamishness. Why? Is it a fear of supernaturalism, the \'93threat\'94 of supernaturalism McDowell speaks of? If so, I undertake the question of whether this kind of neo-Aristotelianism can be compatible with atheism, and answer in the affirmative. If it is true, no one should reject it for fear of truth leading to some other belief. \
\
Note that the structure of this argument is parallels an argument that motivates panpsychists. If 
\i mind 
\i0 is natural and radically different from matter (where emergence is disputed) then mind must \'93be there\'94 from the beginning. I don\'92t wish to strengthen or weaken my case by reference to the parallel, but simply to mention it. The panpsychists are right to dispute the emergence of consciousness which is something (a) so radically different from all the sub-atomic particles, elements, chemicals, chemical compounds, organisms and organs in the cosmos and (b) such a dramatically late-comer in the cosmos, taking billions of years to emerge. They are wrong to place all the emphasis on consciousness. A better place to dispute is the emergence of 
\i natural normativity. 
\i0 Normatively had to be there from the beginning. As Thomas Nagel argues, 
\i telos 
\i0 had to be there. Or so I will argue. }