{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red102\green102\blue102;\red17\green85\blue204;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc1\levelnfcn1\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{upper-roman\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc1\levelnfcn1\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat2\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{upper-roman\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid5}
{\list\listtemplateid6\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc1\levelnfcn1\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat3\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{upper-roman\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid501\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid6}
{\list\listtemplateid7\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid601\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid7}
{\list\listtemplateid8\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc1\levelnfcn1\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat4\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{upper-roman\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid701\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid8}
{\list\listtemplateid9\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid801\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid9}
{\list\listtemplateid10\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid901\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc4\levelnfcn4\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{lower-alpha\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid902\'02\'01.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listlevel\levelnfc2\levelnfcn2\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{lower-roman\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid903\'02\'02.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li2160\lin2160 }{\listname ;}\listid10}
{\list\listtemplateid11\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc1\levelnfcn1\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat2\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{upper-roman\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1001\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid11}
{\list\listtemplateid12\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc4\levelnfcn4\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{lower-alpha\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1102\'02\'01.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid12}
{\list\listtemplateid13\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat143\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1201\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid13}
{\list\listtemplateid14\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1301\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid14}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}{\listoverride\listid6\listoverridecount0\ls6}{\listoverride\listid7\listoverridecount0\ls7}{\listoverride\listid8\listoverridecount0\ls8}{\listoverride\listid9\listoverridecount0\ls9}{\listoverride\listid10\listoverridecount0\ls10}{\listoverride\listid11\listoverridecount0\ls11}{\listoverride\listid12\listoverridecount0\ls12}{\listoverride\listid13\listoverridecount0\ls13}{\listoverride\listid14\listoverridecount0\ls14}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Robert Adams, 
\i Finite and Infinite Goods 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Oxford University Press, 1999. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Overview:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 The good is transcendent and infinite; the good is god. This metaphysics of morals makes best sense of moral semantics. The primary finite good is intrinsic excellence. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Synopsis:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sa220
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Introduction
\b0 : Finite and infinite goods\'97many finite and one infinite. This book proposes a framework for ethics that is organized around a transcendent Good and its relation to the many finite goods of our experience. Two main themes contained in this idea should be emphasized at the outset: the centrality of the 
\i good
\i0 , and the
\i transcendence
\i0  of the infinite Good. I begin with the latter.
\b \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 I.	The Nature of the Good \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 1.	God as the Good
\b0 . This chapter introduces the book's central theses about the nature of the Good: that God is the Good itself, the definitive standard of excellence, occupying roughly the role assigned to the Form of the Good or the Beautiful in Plato's Republic and Symposium, and that the excellence of other things consists in a sort of resemblance to God. These are presented not as claims in the semantics of morals, about the meaning of \'93good\'94, but as claims in the metaphysics of morals, about the nature of goodness or (more precisely) of excellence. The chapter explores philosophical issues about these views and their implications regarding the nature of God.
\b \
2.	The transcendence of the Good
\b0 . This chapter considers how far we should expect beliefs to be confirmed in the same way in ethics as in science, and argues that precisely by setting limits to empirical confirmation in ethics, the thesis of the transcendence of the Good enables theism to provide more adequately than naturalism can for a critical stance that is important to ethics. The Good's transcendence, its surpassing all other good things and all our conceptions of the Good, is understood here in qualitative and positive rather than formal and negative terms, and as supporting an open\uc0\u8208 endedness in ideals of human life.
\b \
3.	Well-being and excellence.
\b0  Intrinsic excellence holds a primary place among types of value in the theory developed here. Today, many moralists are reluctant to grant such a place to excellence. Well\uc0\u8208 being (what is good for a person) is a much more popular type of value. In vindication of the centrality of excellence, this chapter argues that well\u8208 being is actually best understood in terms of excellence, as a life characterized by enjoyment of the excellent; whereas currently the most influential type of theory of well\u8208 being, in terms of desire\u8208 satisfaction, cannot adequately account for the ways in which people often desire what is not good for them.
\b \
4.	The Sacred and the Bad
\b0 . Badness is not understood here, in parallel with goodness, as resemblance to a transcendent Bad. Rather it is understood in relation to the Good, as privation of goodness, more gravely as opposition to goodness, or in the most horrifying cases as violation of something sacred. This chapter takes a widely shared sense of moral horror at certain actions as a clue in developing the relevant concepts of violation (here preferred to that of defilement) and the sacred. The treatment of the sacred in terms of images of God provides a context for an account of the special value of persons as persons.
\b \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 II.	Loving the Good \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 5.	Eros. This chapter argues that Eros is an intrinsically excellent as well as beneficial form of love that deserves a place in our conception of God's love and in our ideal of human love. As Eros is conceived here, its central feature is relational desire: the lover desires or prizes, for its own sake, some relationship with the beloved, where the beloved is typically a person but may be an impersonal object such as mathematics or philosophy. It is argued that Eros is not always selfish or even self\uc0\u8208 interested, though it is essentially an agent\u8208 centered motive.\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl0
\b \cf0 6.	Grace
\b0 . Grace is conceived here as love that is not completely explained by the excellence of its object. This chapter argues that authentic love, divine as well as human, necessarily has something of the character of grace. That is because what is truly loved must be loved for its own sake, and hence with a certain particularity and noncomparative appreciation. The chapter considers what sorts of reasons for love, and what grounds for ascribing universality to God's love, are compatible with this particularity.
\b \
7.	Devotion
\b0 . This chapter defends devotion to the Good as such, or to God, as an integrative ideal and organizing principle for human motivation. It explores ways in which the infinite good or God can be loved 
\i in
\i0  loving finite goods with full particularity. Ideas of higher order preferences and of alliance with God, and with those who love the Good play an important part in this integration of loves.
\b \
8.	Idolatry
\b0 . Not all devotion to good things is good. Under the heading of idolatry, this chapter offers a partial anatomy of good motives gone bad. This subject is discussed (1) in relation to priorities and excessively consuming passions, (2) in relation to inappropriate \'93needs\'94 and the sense that life would not be worth living without particular finite goods, and (3) in relation to misidentification of finite goods with the supreme Good.
\b \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 9.	Symbolic Value. This chapter argues that it is good to care about what one's actions and one's life symbolize, express, and stand for, and good in some cases to act for the sake of such symbolic values in preference to more extrinsic and more tangible consequences because expressive action provides a way of 
\i being for
\i0  important goods, a way that is especially important in situations of relative helplessness (though not only there). This argument is related to conceptions of martyrdom, eschatology, and worship.\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0
\b \cf0 III.	The Good and the Right\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls7\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 10.	 
\b Obligation. 
\b0 This chapter argues that obligation (unlike goodness or value) is essentially social, being a matter of what is required of persons by persons in a context of social relationship. The social nature of obligation is discussed in relation to social and psychological sanctions, to guilt, and to the reasons, which valuing one's social bonds gives one to take social requirements seriously. The chapter also argues, however, that human societies are not good enough for their requirements to define morally binding obligations.\
\ls7\ilvl0
\b 11.	Divine Commands. 
\b0 This chapter defends a divine command theory of obligation, proposing God as the one whose requirements are good enough to define morally binding obligations. It discusses (1) the history of divine command metaethics, (2) the reasons for treating divine commands as morally binding, (3) the advantages of conceiving of obligation in terms of divine \'93commands\'94 rather than divine will, (4) the nature and epistemology of divine commands, and (5) the compatibility of divine commands with human autonomy.
\b \
12.	Abraham\'92s Dilemma. 
\b0 This chapter addresses the greatest fear about divine commands \'96 that God may command something evil \'96 focusing on a modernized version of Genesis 22 (influenced by Kierkegaard), in which Abraham finds it difficult to reject any of the following jointly incompatible beliefs: (1) whatever God commands is not morally wrong to do, (2) God commands me to kill my son as a sacrifice, (3) such human sacrifice is morally wrong. It argues that divine command theorists should not reject (1) but that in any cultural and religious context in which the dilemma can be taken seriously, (2) is the belief to reject.
\b \
13.	Vocation. 
\b0 This chapter argues that the moral life needs good projects, engaging one's love or commitment, that are one's own in a morally valid way, and that the concept of vocation is helpful in structuring this aspect of the moral life. Vocation may be conceived in terms of either a command or an invitation from God. The argument here suggests that it will normally be a matter of actual goods that are given to one to love, and that it should be connected with a conception of one's selfhood. This conception is defended against act consequentialism as a way of identifying one's own moral tasks.
\b \
14.	Politics and the good. 
\b0 This chapter argues, contrary to some leading versions of political liberalism, that considerations of excellence have a legitimate place in political ethics, and even in the most plausible grounding of the civil rights that most concern liberals. It defends the pursuit of excellence from charges that it must offend against a reasonable egalitarianism. It argues also for a type of separation of church and state, and for contextually sensitive state action to promote and protect widely recognized goods involving excellence.
\b \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls8\ilvl0\cf0 IV.	The Epistemology of Value\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0\cf0 15.	Revelation of the Good. 
\b0 This chapter proposes a doxastic practice epistemology for ethics, holding that we rightly, and probably inescapably, rely on belief\uc0\u8208 forming dispositions that we have formed in learning social practices of evaluation. In the context of a theistic metaethics, the reliability of such practices and dispositions is explained in terms of a concept of \'93general revelation,\'94 a concept that allows that some to whom ethical truths are revealed may be atheists. The chapter also expounds a conception of \'93special revelation\'94 connected with historic religious traditions, in which particular possibilities of goodness may be empirically discovered and divine commands may be addressed to particular communities at particular times.
\b \
16.	Moral Faith. 
\b0 Theistic metaethics has been suspected of imposing on morality a need for faith. This chapter argues that morality has such a need in any case, with or without theism. It argues this with regard both to faith in morality itself and to faith in moral ends (for instance, faith that human life and the moral life are worth living). It explores cognitive, volitional, and emotional aspects of moral faith.
\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sa220
\ls9\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0\cf0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls9\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Precis\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls10\ilvl0\cf2 1.	Introduction: \
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls10\ilvl1
\b0 \cf0 a.	Two themes: the good is central. The good is transcendent. \
b.	The good is god. He aims for \'93a comprehensive, up\uc0\u8208 to\u8208 date philosophical account of what a theistic framework for ethics might look like. Such an account should not limit itself to the relatively abstract topics of the nature of the good and the right, but should also explore ways in which a variety of religious concepts may enrich the texture of ethical thought.\'94 \
c.	Loving the excellent and doing one\'92s duty \'97 both are important but loving the excellent takes precedence. The good being (first of all,) intrinsic 
\i excellence 
\i0 rather than human well-being \'97 including aesthetic and intellectual excellence as well as fidelity to interpersonal obligation. \
d.	It is a \'93framework\'94 so more broad than metaethics \'97 he will include primary ethical discussions of love, etc. But it should accomodate other religions. \
e.	He will not argue the existence of God or make a pass at the problem of evil. \
f.	God is the good or th ebeautiful. Everything else is good by resemblance, more or less, to him. The good always transcends the finite goods. The 
\i kind 
\i0 of goodness he is is intrinsic excellence. \
g.	Our relation to the supreme good does not consist merely in 
\i doing good
\i0  \'97 but first of all 
\i being for 
\i0 or 
\i loving 
\i0 the good. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls10\ilvl0
\b \cf2 2.	The Nature of the Good\
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls10\ilvl1
\i\b0 \cf2 a.	Introduction\
\pard\tx1800\tx2160\pardeftab720\li2160\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls10\ilvl2
\i0 \cf0 i.	Beauty itself is transcendent, and \'93all other beautiful things are beautiful by \'93participating\'94 in it (Symposium 211b). \
ii.	Beauty is a species of good.\
iii.	It is not instrumental goodness (usefulness) or well-being (good for a person), but that which is \'93worthy of love or admiration\'94. Adams will call this \'93excellence.\'94\
iv.	Identifying the transcendent Good with God is not surprising \'97 Philo and Augustine do so. \
v.	We are not talking about Forms or universals, but of value. \
vi.	Forms are sometimes treated as universals, sometimes as exemplars. God as the Good is a concrete (though not a physical) individual \'97 and a person or \'93something importantly like a person.\'94 \
vii.	The Good explains both moral and non-moral value. \
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls10\ilvl1
\i \cf2 b.	The semantics and the metaphysics of value\
\pard\tx1800\tx2160\pardeftab720\li2160\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls10\ilvl2
\i0 \cf0 i.	The switch of style and method to \'93analytical\'94 philosophy is motivated by the belief that we ought not talk about the natures of things but about the meanings of words that signify them \'97 from the good to the term \'91good.\'92\
ii.	Adam\'92s thesis that finite goods are good insofar as they have resemblance to God is not about the term per se but the nature of goodness. \
iii.	The approach to avoid doing analysis of language exclusively is to distinguish questions about natures of things from questions about terms and meaning. \
iv.	For example, \'91water is H2O\'92 may be a true statement about water\'92s nature without being needed to fix the reference of the term \'91water\'92 to the clear liquid stuff we can identify ostensibly. \
v.	Analogously, the term \'91good\'92 \'93may be related to the nature of the good in something like the way that has been proposed for natural kinds\'94 (16). \
vi.	As Plato (Socrates) describes the Good as the end of every action that the agent does not adequately grasp, so it is. \
vii.	The good itself (the nature of the good) may be referred to by various words, and the word \'91good\'92 in various contexts may pick out different things. An adequate account of the good (itself) need not explain every contextualized use of the term \'91good.\'92\
viii.	The contexts we are looking at are those in which the term \'91good\'92 likely means \'91excellence,\'92 not well-being or usefulness. \
ix.	Goodness may be a property of states of affairs, but beauty can be a property of persons, physical objects, poems, mathematical proofs, qualities, deeds, lives. Beauty or excellence are probably not properties of states of affairs in general. \
x.	\'93Maximization of the sum of excellence in the world (if such a sum can be computed), or of the degree of excellence attained somewhere in the world, may not itself be excellent.\'94\
xi.	Insisting that we account for every use (in every context) of the word \'91good\'92 \'93stack[s] the deck\'94 in the favor of noncognitivists, since sometimes we use the word with no other meaning than a general feeling of approbation, a favorable attitude. \
xii.	Our use of the terms \'91good\'92 and \'91goodness\'92 and their cognates when we mean excellence has objective purport, as if we were speaking of a mind-independent property \'97 they \'93favor realism.\'94\
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls10\ilvl1
\i \cf2 c.	Eros and the Good\
\pard\tx1800\tx2160\pardeftab720\li2160\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls10\ilvl2
\i0 \cf0 i.	Goodness as excellence is not clearly \'93the object of every pursuit;\'94 more likely it is the object particularly of eros or erotic pursuits (broadly construed to include \'93passion for justice or philosophy\'94 etc).\
ii.	 Eros pursues \'93its object as intrinsically valuable\'94 and admires it before pursuing it. \
iii.	Desires do not always aim for the good (either by aiming for the not-good or failing to aim for the good) \'97 but Adams is not providing a theory of the good in terms of the desirable. \
iv.	Error is \'93important to [his] theory\'94 but not \'93unbounded scope for error;\'94 we \'93cannot always or even usally be totally mistaken about goodness.\'94\
v.	Goodness is the object of admiration, desire, and recognition (as good). \
vi.	Saying it is \'93excellent to value the excellent\'94 and that \'93the excellent is what it is excellent to value\'94 sounds circular, and threatens the notion of objectivity we are aiming for. \
vii.	Instead, our pursuit of the good (even without adequate knowledge of its nature) \'93determines what sort of thing would 
\i satisfy 
\i0 the pursuit\'94 \'97 if we saw the Good or God (after much effort) we would recognize it/Him as the thing we were pursuing (however imperfectly) all along. \
viii.	That answer still includes a value judgment, since the good would \'93best satisfy\'94 the pursuit. Is this still circular? We must give up the attempt to \'93get value judgment out of the foundations of objectivity.\'94As he says, \'93My response is to suggest that our reasonable aspiration is not to get value judgments out of the foundations of objectivity, which is probably impossible, but to allow there only value judgments that are very plausibly objective. Judgments of closeness of fit can be very plausibly objective, if they are based on extensive knowledge and are not, intuitively, \'93close calls.\'94 And the one and only factually omniscient being, if reflectively and unselfishly sympathetic, would very plausibly be classified as an objectively ideal judge.\'94\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls10\ilvl0
\b \cf2 3.	The Transcendence of the Good\
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls10\ilvl1
\b0 \cf0 a.	Abstract: Is the good empirically verifiable? Is naturalism (immanence of value) or transcendence more suitable to \'93a critical stance\'94? Theism and the transcendence of the good, understood in qualitative, positive terms, makes more sense of an \'93open-endedness in ideals of human life.\'94\
b.	Introduction\
\pard\tx1800\tx2160\pardeftab720\li2160\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls10\ilvl2\cf0 i.	Objectivity and transcendence are opposed to \'93all forms of subjectivism, noncognitivism, and antirealism about value\'94 but also against realisms like \'93all forms of naturalism which would seek the nature of value exclusively within the horizon of the physical and human world.\'94 (50). \
ii.	The good is \'93not exactly \'91at home\'92 in human life.\'94 \
iii.	Excellence lies beyond our cognitive grasp and so is difficult to characterize, except by negative terms.\
iv.	Saints are not best characterized as lacking flaws, being tame, etc \'97 but as strangely and positively rich. \
v.	Holiness, goodness that is beyond human comprehension and human purposes, is not \'91nice\'92 but \'93fearful and in some ways dangerous.\'94\
vi.	The holy person is \'93occassionally bizarre, and often unnatural.\'94 \
vii.	If sainthood is \'93incorporated into\'94 our ethical thinking, then it implies that \'93the full development of the normal and natural is not the capstone of ethical aspiration\'94 contra Nussbaum.\
viii.	Nussbaum affirms a \'93fully human target of complete virtue\'94 (54). \
ix.	Is \'93complete virtue\'94 a limited thing? Adams thinks not. Even Nussbaum admits that virtue will require tragic sacrifices.  Also, the golden means are often incommensurable.  Finally, fully doing one\'92s duty 
\i completely 
\i0 is not open-ended enough. Saints not only fulfill duties we know about but open up new horizons of duty we never dreamed of. Christ\'92s human virtue need not have been maximal and \'93complete\'94 in a limited sense. \
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls10\ilvl1
\i \cf2 c.	Naturalism\
\pard\tx1800\tx2160\pardeftab720\li2160\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls10\ilvl2
\i0 \cf0 i.	 I have been leaving epistemological issues to one side for the moment, however, and exploring the role that explanations in moral terms play in our ordinary thinking, which is not dominated by the skeptical challenge, but by trying to make our way in life.\
ii.	Moore is the paradigm Anglophone nonnaturalist; Boyd will serve as a paradigm or canonical naturalist. \
iii.	Boyd does not attempt to define the good. \
iv.	The good is a natural kind, a homeostatic property-cluster, that occur together, and in some cases of imperfect clustering is difficult to discern. They have \'93no analytic definition\'94 (60).  Boyd is still a consequentialist. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls10\ilvl0\cf0 4.	The Sacred and the Bad\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls11\ilvl0
\b \cf2 II.	Loving the Good \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 5.	Eros\
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl1\cf0 a.	Can God love finite goods? It seems not, if all new goods are either improvements on God (which is impossible) or not improvements (not desirable). Eros can be \'93appreciative contemplation\'94 or \'93liking of some present good\'94 and not just desire for an absent good or the futurity of a present good. \
b.	God\'92s Eros might be \'93uncertain of its future goods\'94, since people are free.  \
c.	2. Is Eros self-interested? Being agent centered does not entail being agent self-interested.  \
d.	He is not using (137) \'93eros\'94 in exactly Plato\'92s nor exactly Nygren\'92s sense. \
e.	4. (142) the Value of Love\'92s interest in relationshiop. Is relationship lovable, or is it only benevolence to the other person in the relationship? Not utilitarian theories ascribe value to friendship itself. \
f.	We don\'92t just want 
\i benefits 
\i0 from our friends (instrumental goods) like money, we want their affection and regard for its own sake (143). We value his valuing the relationship for its own sake. \
g.	What do we value in a friendship? Some benevolence (consideration, kindness, generosity) some conscientousness ( trustworthines, reliability, dutifulness, patience, discretion, practical wisdom) appreciativeness (likes and enjoys other person, recognizes and celebrates strengths and excellences, gald of her existence, interested in friend herself not just well-being). \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl0
\b \cf2 6.	Grace\
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl1
\b0 \cf0 a.	Love that is not completely explained by the excellence of its object is grace. Human and divine love has something of grace in it.\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl0
\b \cf2 7.	Devotion\
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl1
\b0 \cf0 a.	How do we love the infinite good 
\i by 
\i0 or 
\i through 
\i0 loving finite goods? \
b.	177 Interested in \'93agent ethics\'94. Adams is interested in \'93ethics of motive,\'94 not just virtues and vices. \
c.	\'93Motive utilitarianism\'94 evaluates motives by their consequences. Different from \'93act\'94 utilitarianism.\
d.	178 the value of art is \'93cannot be explained very well in terms of its utility.\'94\
e.	179 motives are evaluated on the basis of the excellence of their aim. \
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl0\cf0 Fragmentation of value\
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl1\cf0 f.	Nagel has argued that there are multiple, equally fundamental, incommensurable systems of value.\
g.	For instance, \'93excessive high-mindedness\'94, interest in exclusively 2nd-personal morality, is bad compared to other kinds of devotion to athletics, philosophy, art. Adams agrees.\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl0\cf0 Integration of Value\
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl1\cf0 h.	How to integrate? Ignore some values \'97 judge from a non-normative perspective (brute willing?) or find a different top of the hierarchy besides (2nd-personal) morality.\
i.	A subjective side of the question is how to suppress or resolve inner conflicts. \
j.	183 An objective side of the question is that utility or instrumental value does not \'93yield an adequate criterion of the ethical value of motives.\'94\
k.	The \'93comprehensive point of view from which we can make sense of valuing motives on the basis of their objects\'94 is goods (both human and nonhuman).\
l.	Someone whose \'93heart is in the right place\'94 is an ally who values goods...\
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl0\cf0 Problem of Total devotion\
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl1\cf0 m.	How can all these loves \'93organized around devotion to God\'94 work? Is \'93maximal devotion to God demanded by theism ... compatible with love for anything finite at all\'94? (185 end of page). \
n.	Augustine\'92s solution, that we don\'92t \'93love\'94 but \'93use\'94 finite things won\'92t tell. \
o.	Plato\'92s worry was about the scandal of particularity. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl0\cf0 Love as alliance\
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl1\cf0 p.	Religious life is freindship with god. Friends are allies, with common goals. \
q.	Can\'92t be accidental\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl0
\b \cf2 8.	Idolatry\
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl1
\b0 \cf0 a.	Some devotion to good things is not good. Good motives gone bad can be idolatrous. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl0
\b \cf2 9.	Symbolic Value\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls12\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls12\ilvl0\cf2 Quotes:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sa220
\ls12\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Consider the saints. We often think of the saint in essentially negative terms, as someone who never, or almost never, does a no\uc0\u8208 no; or in terms of universal quantification, as a person all, or almost all, of whose actions meet a high moral and religious standard. This conception does not meet the test of reality very well. Saints, and especially the most interesting and attractive among them, are typically rough\u8208 edged and controversial characters, liable to quite reasonable and often serious criticism from various directions. What is wonderful about them is nothing so tame as a freedom from faults, but something much more positive\'97and much stranger, as I will soon be arguing.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/view/10.1093/0195153715.001.0001/acprof-9780195153712-chapter-3#acprof-9780195153712-note-48"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \ul \ulc3 1}}\
Similarly, in thinking about the divine perfection, or the attributes of the being that is the standard of value, we should suppose that God's superiority exceeds our cognitive grasp in a positive direction, and is not exhausted by negative or universalizing operations on properties familiar to us. The divine knowledge, love, beauty are not just free from defects we can identify; they contain a richness we can hardly name.{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/view/10.1093/0195153715.001.0001/acprof-9780195153712-chapter-3#acprof-9780195153712-note-49"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \ul \ulc3 2}} To us this richness is bound to b alien in ways we may find uncomfortable.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls12\ilvl0\cf0 \
If goodness is natural, then we should expect that goodness as it is actually sought and found by our race is familiar, \'91natural\'92 (in the sense that natural is opposed to artificial or forced). It ought always and only to relate to the flourishing of the human race collectively, or human individuals, or living races akin to ours (monkeys, dolphins), or living things in general. \
But neither of these consequents are true. So goodness is not natural. \
Goodness is often uncomfortable, a \'93richness we cannot conceive\'94 rather than an absence of blemishes. \
\
Holiness is wonderful in a \'93way that escapes both our human understanding and human purposes.\'94 Evidence in this favor is holiness is reflected but not contained in non-human aspects. The non-moral goodness (beauty, for instance) of a state of affairs or an aspect that is good. \
\
\'93The saints are occasionally flourishing specimens of humanity in all the obvious ways, but usually not. They feel compunctions, and are torn by doubts, that others do not know. They cling to a longing for goods that lie beyond any ordinary human possibility of attainment. Their behavior seems occasionally bizarre, and often unnatural. Kissing lepers and praying for people who are torturing you definitely do not seem natural responses. Indeed, I think it is often precisely in the unnaturalness, or better the supernaturalness, of the saints' goodness that their wonderfulness is found. In them it seems that we can glimpse or touch a goodness that is more than theirs, a superhuman, a transcendent goodness that we too long for.\'94 (52-53)\
\
 I have been leaving epistemological issues to one side for the moment, however, and exploring the \
role that explanations in moral terms play in our ordinary thinking, which is not dominated by the skeptical challenge, but by trying to make our way in life.\
\
\'93 Like most philosophically interesting concepts, those of resemblance and of God are attended with their own questions for understanding. Nonetheless, most of us not only use the concept of resemblance with confidence (as we do that of goodness) but also think we understand that resemblances are grounded in features of reality.\'94 (30 ish)\
\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls13\ilvl0\cf0 (143)	\'93We will not regard them as benefiting us in the same way if we do not think the other person values them for their own sake; and if it is right to think that the \'93enjoyment\'94 of the illusion of a good relationship is not a true benefit, then we are not truly benefited by these relations unless the other person really does value them for their own sake.\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls13\ilvl0\cf0 \
"One of my main aims in the present chapter is to combat an overmoralized ideal of love as pure benevolence, which would not allow God to desire, for its own sake, a relationship with creatures, or to love beauty or other impersonal goods. Benevolence must certainly play a major part in the divine love; but I will argue that noninstrumental interests in relationships and excellences should also be part of the ideal of love for us humans, and may reasonably be ascribed to God, and that something we can characterize as Eros may therefore appropriately be seen as a part of the divine love.\
\
God loves. But God is the good. So God loves himself, does he love anything else? He does love others (contra Aristotle). He doesn't just have benevolence\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls13\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Reflections\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls13\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Adam\'92s book is excellent, but hardly amounts to argument. He may oppose many different ethical views \'97 naturalism, nihilism, utilitarianism \'97 but he does not have clear opponents. It is not a fighting book, but an exploration of \'91an ethical framework.\'92 That that framework has been the framework for western civilization for the last 2000 years will not, to some, commend it as interesting. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls13\ilvl0
\b \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\f1\b0\fs22 \cf0 \
\
\
A symposium on Adam\'92s book in 2002: Adams summarizes the book. Responses by Nussbaum, Quinn, Susan Wolffe. Read some responses and assess the debate... See whether the naturalists have a case. See whether Adams has a good rebuttal. \
Also Boyd. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\i \cf0 Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
\i0 Vol 64. 2002 439-490. 
\i \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\i0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls14\ilvl0
\b\fs28 \cf0 Discussion\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b0\fs20 \cf0 \'93There is a more pressing difficulty, however, for the thesis that Godlikeness is sufficient for excellence. More decisive counterexamples to it are possible, involving holistic resemblance rather than mere sharing of properties.\'94 (33). \
\
Is godlikeness by being powerful (sharing one property) \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Is resemblance objective? \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Yes (33). \
God\'92s judgment about \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b \cf0 What forms does excllence take? \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Alliance with the good \'97 being for the good\
Being for others who are allied with the good \'97 necessary, but not sufficient. \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b \cf0 What kind of resemblance constitutes excellence\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 God is the judge. (36)\
Excellence is an intersection or conjunction of being like god and that are reasons for god to love that. \
\
Not even God maximizes excellence. We are for it. \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Is beauty an excellence?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 We do make judgments of beauty, and we do distinguish beauty from sublimity and other sorts of excellence. If our judgments of beauty track something objective, as I believe they do, they presumably are tracking some way in which experienced, mundane beautiful objects resemble each other, and in which they do not resemble sublime things universally or as such. In my view this will also be a way in which beautiful objects point beyond themselves to a transcendent ideal, and in which they resemble or image God. Sublime objects will also resemble or image God, but in a different way, related to the different way in which they resemble each other.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Chapter 2\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 His platonism makes sense of why there has never been a fully adequate ethical theory (one that gives us final answers). There is a qualitative open-endedness \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b \cf0 The good and well-being\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Deep ecology recognizes non-human value, of the environment say. Non-human nature has its own intrinsic goods. An ecosystem has beauty.  It is somewhat platonist. Independent of human valuations or needs. If humanity were to disappear, would things still have value?\
\
Is one of the virtues appreciation of beauty and the good in all forms? Foot might say this. \
Eudaimonists wouldn\'92t think this way. But theoreia is contemplation of the logoi of nature. \
\
Kant is explicit that the only thing that is good in itself is the good will. He is following Scotus, and before him Anselm. We have the will for justice and the will for self-satisfaction (or survival? something like that?) The moral struggle is the struggle for both of those. The moral will becomes the will for justice. For Kant you can fit in the ..\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Aristotle a Hedonist?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Avoids it by saying that what is pleasurable by anture is different from pleasant to us. Intelligible by nature / intelligible to us.\
The fully generous person takes pleasure in giving ... the friendly person genuinely takes pleasure in the company of others... not necessarily for us. \
The pleasure discussion itself (last part of Book VII and Book X) pleasure supervenes upon completed activity. The most natural forms of activity produce natural pleasure \'97 and there are unnatural pleasures. It\'92s obvious that there are unnatural pleasures. \
The same is true for Plato. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Flourishing\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Flourishing is different from pleasure. Flourishing appears to be naturalistic because we use it for other animal species; we judge when the buffalo is flourishing based on its fulfillment of its characteristic activities, and some optimal conditions. We do that on the basis of our judgment of what nature is like. Dogs need to run to flourish. The dog doesn\'92t know what its missing. But we can recognize that is not dog flourishing. That\'92s straightforward. Try to transfer that to human beings. \
\
The human case is so much more complex. We have culture. Our culture evolves and changes. \
[MacIntyre includes in the good the freedom and ability to achieve the good, to define the good, to seek the good].  There is a kind of openendedness and indeterminacy to what it would mean to flourish. You can\'92t just take a human being \'97 see he is not hungry, has reproduced, has shelter and clothing, and so that\'92s a flourishing life. \
\
Is flourishing a list? if so, how does one adjudicate when goods come into conflict? THe completeness of the list? The justification for the list? What criterion gets things on the list \'97 happy things? Does it seem that their lives... \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Pleasure and Joy\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls14\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 NT uses \'93kaire\'94 all over the place. Does it use \'93hedone\'94 ever? The saints\'92 lives are not necessarily pleasant, but yes joyful. Paul says \'93make my joy complete\'94 it\'92s relational. Hail Mary, rejoice, \'93Xaire\'94 full of joy. When Symeon receives the child there is sorrow in this, and great joy. Joy is compatible with sorrow, and grief, and loss.... St John Climacus \'93joyful sorrow\'94 \'97 \
K: Why aren\'92t they both pleasure?\
DBrad: Joy is relational in a way that pleasure is not. Asked parents with kids versus parents without kids \'97 parents with kids were slightly less happy but more joyful. Joy is not a subjective state of consciousness at all, its an awareness of the range of life \'97 what your life embraces \'97 your life is broader.  There is more potential for loss and suffering. When you have children, they can be sick, deformed, you can lose them. Joy is inseperable from the openness to loss. That openness to loss is there because the breadth of life is greater. Whether it brings pleasure with it is a big question mark. \
\
Gregory Nyssa. Some activities are pleasant by nature. The ever-increasing cycle of the good, progress \'97 with the acquisition of the good comes a growing desire for the good. He likes the mean between vices. \
\
}