{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc3\levelnfcn3\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{upper-alpha\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 In this chapter, we examine the ethical thought of Alasdair MacIntyre. MacIntyre\'92s oeuvre spans many decades and embodies many schools of thought. I shall treat his later work (from 
\i After Virtue 
\i0 to 
\i Dependent Rational Animals
\i0 ) as most definitive. Our first goal is to summarize and interact with just a few important theses of his key writings. Our second goal is to critique these points and draw from them lessons we can endorse, and upon which we can build in later chapters. \
MacIntyre thinks that virtues are good and useful for transforming communities and persons. At the practical level of daily life, a small community (such as a family or town or university) would do well to organize themselves around a common vision of what is good and a common conception of what qualities will help everyone to attain that good. Even though such a common vision of and pursuit of virtue is impossible to scale up indefinitely for 300 millions people in America, it is possible and beneficial at smaller, local scales. At the theoretical  level of philosophical ethics, the concepts of virtue, practical wisdom, and happiness supply for moral theory what many modern moralities have not: a clear, coherent, useful, and justifiable theory that grounds a 
\i rational 
\i0 pursuit of the good life and 
\i resolvable
\i0  moral disagreements. \
So, in this chapter, I shall seek to elucidate the concept or concepts of virtue operative in MacIntyre\'92s theory. I shall also situate that theory against the backdrop of failed modern moral philosophies presented in the previous chapter.  Finally, I shall critically discuss some of MacIntyre\'92s key points and build on them toward two theses of my own.\
By way of preview, the first thesis I shall offer is that success in moral inquiry is possible because moral inquiry answers (or can answer) to the moral facts. (This is my idiosyncratic statement of moral realism.) Moral inquiry, I shall argue, must be conceived (like psychology) as a process rather than (like mathematics) a static and ready-made argument about universal relations between propositional truths. The object studied by ethics is not merely ethical principles but ethical persons; but the subject studying ethics is also the ethical person. So, unlike mathematics or physics, the subject is also the object. One feature of persons is that we are living a finite life, beginning in complete ignorance (as children) and progressing toward death. So moral inquiry, when successful, is that part of our life when we become sensitive to reasons, and begin (usually under guidance) to reflect on our own nature as practical reasoners. We first reflect on our projects, commitments, and priorities, and secondly begin to adjust our projects to pursue worthy ends by better means or to pursue ends we find more worthy. \
The second thesis I shall defend is that moral inquiry depends indispensably on natural teleology, on what Philippa Foot calls \'93natural goodness.\'94 \'91Natural teleology\'92 is a fancy phrase, but the point is simple: Some 
\i ends
\i0  are real and natural; some 
\i end-directed 
\i0 motions, processes, and actions are real and natural. The notion of natural teleology has been disregarded, maligned, and misunderstood for many generations. So clarifying and defending my version of it will be an important piece of this chapter. As a brief pre-payment, I shall distinguish between various kinds of end-directed activity, from least controversial to most: (A) the end-directed (definitely intentional) actions and speech-acts of individual human subjects (e.g., going to the gym to get fit or uttering a sentence to communicate a proposition) and (B) the end-directed (definitely intentional) actions of groups, associations, societies; (C) the end-directed (intentional?) actions of all human beings in virtue of their humanity; (D) the end-directed (possibly intentional) processes of non-human animals (e.g., a deer fleeing a predatory to survive or a turtle swimming ashore to lay eggs); (E) the end-directed (though non-intentional) functions or processes of organic systems (the heart pumping blood to oxygenate the body, the optical photoreceptors converting light signals to electricity to produce sight); (F) the end-directed (though non-intentional) processes of individual non-organic substances (the piece of ice melting at 33 degrees Fahrenheit, the sunlight streaming through the atmosphere to make the plants grow); and (G) the end-directed (though non-intentional) global or cosmic process by which the universe seems to be moving (forming planets that can bring about life; abiogenerating life so as to bring about complex organisms). Having distinguished these, not all of them shall I defend.\
Rather, the centrality of at least some human social or natural teleology (A)-(C) to normative virtue ethics cannot be understated. And the centrality of natural teleology \'97 some subset of (C)-(G) \'97 to giving a plausible foundation of virtue will be seen in not only MacIntyre, but Foot, Hursthouse, and Brown. Briefly, i\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
n 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
After Virtue 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
MacIntyre presented a \'93socially teleological\'94 account of human virtue and practice rather than a \'93biologically teleological\'94 account \'97 one that \'93does not require the identifi\uc0\u142 cation of any teleology in nature\'94 (183%).\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0  I shall try to defend both. But for now, we must turn to a survey of MacIntyre\'92s ethical theory. 
\i \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i0\b \cf0 Moral and Metaethical Disagreement\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 MacIntyre\'92s oeuvre may be seen as a response to the problem of moral disagreement. He was frustrated (as we have all been!) but the apparent impossibility of settling some moral disagreements. Both parties are passionate, informed, intelligent, open-minded and yet cannot come to anything like agreeing on the permissibility of abortion, the death penalty, the minimum wage, to name a few. The apparent impossibility of settling moral disagreements over weighty primary normative issues, like abortion, sexual ethics, torture, war, the proper uses of technology has become 
\i the 
\i0 defining datum of modern reflection on morality and ethics. \
MacIntyre observed the similarity to disagreement in moral/philosophical discussions and the disagreement in scientific discussions. He accordingly began to speculate about the possibility that Kuhn and Feyarabend\'92s analyses of scientific progress and scientific crisis could be fruitfully applied to ethics. While Feyerabend ended in a radical pluralism about rationality and methodology, a scientific relativism unpalatable to many scientific realists (like myself), MacIntyre\'92s theory attempts (some would say unsuccessfully) to avoid relativism. But this is getting ahead of myself.  \
The fact is that people disagree about morals. Many metaethicists react such widespread, rampant, shrill, and apparently intractable moral disagreement by giving up on moral realism. The old project was a searching for the objective moral facts, the self-evident moral truths, or fundamental moral principles by which moral disagreements can be peaceably and reasonably settled without browbeating, censorship, name-calling, and ejection from the conversation. The new project is to accept the painful truth that there are no such facts, no such truths, no such principles: agreement is either impossible or is going to come about by different means: social contract, say, or disparate communities accepting disparate sets of \'93common values\'94, each set incommensurable with the others but also invincible to criticism.\
Other metaethicists react to widespread moral disagreement by redoubling their efforts to restore moral agreement by reference to moral facts, truths, or principles. Kantian (Korsgaard), utilitarian, contractarian, and now virtue ethical theorists compete in the marketplace of metaethics for the proper way to secure morality. \
It may not be obvious to those of us reading deeply in the discipline, but a moment\'92s reflection on modern metaethics reveals an iteration of the problem of moral disagreement. The disagreement among metaethicists (since Moore) about the proper explanation of and solution to disagreement among ethicists (since Hobbes, Hume, and Kant) has become the new problem of disagreement. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 The After Virtue Project
\b0 \
MacIntyre engaged in this metaethical dispute for some years. After a while, he gave up. Instead, he initiated a new project, which some call the 
\i \'93After Virtue 
\i0 Project\'94 (Murphy 2003):  to explain the failure of metaethics to solve the failure of primary ethics. not only moral disagreement but the failure of metaethical explanations of moral disagreement. The key works in this project are 
\i After Virtue 
\i0 (1984)
\i , Whose Justice? Which Rationality? 
\i0 (1988)
\i , 
\i0 and 
\i Three Rival Versions of Moral Inquiry 
\i0 (1990)
\i , 
\i0 and
\i  Dependent Rational Animals 
\i0 (1999). Each lays out more pieces of an unfolding ethical theory, (arguably) culminating in
\i  Dependent Rational Animals. 
\i0 But the MacIntyrean spirit of inquiry demands that we not treat his 
\i last 
\i0 statement of his theory as the 
\i final 
\i0 (ultimate) statement of the theory. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i \cf0 After Virtue 
\i0 most clearly states the problem of moral disagreement in modern moral philosophy, putting it in historical context. It argues that the problem at the root of the problem of moral disagreement is a series of fragmentations, facts from values, the self from the community, my good from the common good, and our concepts of justice and rationality from tradition. Each of these elements contribute to making modern, secular, rationalistic moral enquiry a hopeless endeavor. The upshot is that we have a dilemma: If modern rationalistic morality is hopeless (moral inquiry as encyclopedia), then we must either embrace Nietzsche\'92s self-justifying amoral Will-to-Power (moral inquiry as genealogy), or embrace the Aristotelian tradition of virtue (morality as tradition). \
If the deconstructive argument is correct, then modern moralities like deontology and utilitarianism (including all their trappings and purport of objectivity) are just as expressivistic as emotivism. A recurring theme in 
\i After Virtue 
\i0 and beyond is that there are two possible prognoses of this illness. The first is to abandon the purport of objectivity: follow expressivism and, ultimately, side with Nietzsche. We unmask all rational justifications of morality. We opt for cunning rather than wisdom; amplify our means to deteriorated ends. But we should not embrace Nietzsche. \
The second prognosis is to abandon the totalized fiction of community-free autonomous individual self that animates modern liberalism. \'93We lack,\'94 he says, \'93any coherent rationally defensible statement of the liberal individualist point of view\'94 (241%). If we see ourselves, again, as members of a community within a shared tradition, with shared origins, goals, and standards, then the objectivity and rational basis of morality becomes intelligible again. That is the Aristotelian tradition. We should get back to tradition to go forward. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 After Virtue
\b0 \
Let\'92s look at the problem in a bit more detail. The first and most obvious symptom of the decay of moral discourse and social unity is interminable ethical disagreement.
\f1 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0 MacIntyre, 
\i After Virtue 
\i0 6.
\f1 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0  Moral discourse is largely devoted to moral disagreement, and moral disagreement is largely soaked in a despair of ever reaching agreement.The dual aspect of modern moral philosophy is that disputants on either side 
\i purport to be presenting the objective moral truth 
\i0 and they 
\i possess no unavailable rational standard 
\i0 for supporting their own view, let alone convincing others on purely rational or evidential grounds.  Individually, these aspects are not puzzling: One pattern is that when I meet people who do not share my tastes or preferences, I do not browbeat; I simply I live and let live. Another pattern is that when I meet people whom I view as ignorant or mistaken,  I try to persuade them by appealing to evidence to ascribe to the same rational, putatively objective standards I endorse But moral discourse doesn\'92t fit either of these non-puzzling patterns. how can my own, arbitrary, unaccountable opinions and preferences form the basis for browbeating those who do not share the same opinions and preferences 
\i as if 
\i0 they were not just different from me but ignorant and mistaken? Moral discourse with its expression of moral disagreement still retain the appearance of rationality at the same time that the seem to have given up on the rationality and publically-accessible nature of morality. \
\

\b Virtue, Telos, and Human Nature\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Now let\'92s look at the putative solution in a bit more detail. MacIntyre revisits the seminal text of the \'93Aristotelian tradition\'94: the 
\i Nicomachean Ethics.
\i0  There we find the view that humans \'93like the members of all other species, have a specific nature; and that nature is such that they have certain aims and goals, such that they move by nature towards a specific 
\i telos
\i0 . The good is defined in terms of their specific characteristics\'94 (148%). For Aristotle the virtues are \'93precisely those qualities the possession of which will enable an individual to achieve 
\i eudaemonia 
\i0 and the lack of which will frustrate his movement toward that 
\i telos
\i0 \'94 (148%). \
We can see that Aristotle\'92s account includes these ingredients, all of which interlock with the others to form a coherent picture of a human being or community being excellent at life. (A) Human nature is part of nature; and for Aristotle \'93nature\'94 extends to include formal, final, material, and efficient causes. Hence our practical rationality is natural even though it is not material. Also, our end and (to some degree) the qualities that enable us to achieve that end are 
\i natural to us. 
\i0 (B) The virtues are those qualities that enable persons and communities to achieve their end, which is eudaemonia. (D) The telos of humanity is its (natural) final cause, its end. Eudaemonia is not pleasure, not wealth, not 
\i just 
\i0 wisdom, but virtuous activity.\
MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue is \'93neo-Aristotelian\'94 in that it borrows from but also contrast with Aristotle\'92s. (MacIntyre, for instance, denies that Aristotle\'92s virtues are so timeless, abstract, and generically 
\i human 
\i0 as Aristotle would make them appear; they are partly indexed to 4
\fs16 \super th
\fs24 \nosupersub  century, upper-class, educated Athenian culture.) \
So what is a virtue, for MacIntyre? His account of virtue includes three layers or dimensions: individual, social, and human. The first layer of the account is virtue as 
\i skill. 
\i0 Virtues are those \'93acquired human qualities that enable their possessor to achieve those goods which are internal to practices\'94 (191%). The absence of virtue, by contrast, \'93effectively presents\'94 achieving the goods internal to practice. This definition of virtue (in terms of practices) demands an explication of the concept of practice. A practice, for MacIntyre, is a term of art denoting an activity carried out in a community (of fellow practictioners) according to a common history, common standards, and common goals.  Examples include chess, medicine, farming, politics. Lutz summarizes MacIntyre\'92s famous passage in this way:  a virtue is \'93(1) a complex social activity that (2) enables participants to gain goods internal to the practice. (3) Participants achieve excellence in practices by gaining the internal goods. When participants achieve excellence, (4) the social understandings of excellence in the practice, of the goods of the practice, and of the possibility of achieving excellence in the practice are systematically extended.\'94 (Lutz, 
\i After Virtue 
\i0 187). \
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 	To get this definition in a bit clearer view, take MacIntyre\'92s favored example of a practice: political activity. Political activity can be done for reasons internal or external to the practice. That is, political activity can be done in order to bring about those objects necessarily political: the health, securing, and flourishing of the polis. Or it can be done in order to achieve \'93external\'94 (unessential) goods like fame, power, prestige, or book deals. Effectiveness in attaining these external goods does not constitute virtue. In fact, the desire to pursue external goods in the course of engaging in a practice are 
\i temptations. 
\i0 Virtues are needed to overcome those temptations and to succeed at political activity, judging \'93success\'94 only by the standards defined within practice itself. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 Now, practices are distinct from (but related to) institutions or traditions. For example, a university is an institution defined by a set of practices in which professors and students engage. Thomas is a tradition defined by a set of arguments playing out over time embedded in a social community. \
This distinction helps us to build up the second dimension of virtue.  Virtues indexed to practices are only one part of MacIntyre\'92s account; the second layer or dimension is social. This dimension stands to reason: agents are individuals but not 
\i merely 
\i0 individuals. \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li720\pardirnatural

\fs20 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The virtues find their point and purpose not only in sustaining those relationships necessary if the variety of goods internal to practices are to be achieved and not only in sustaining the form of an individual life in which that individual may seek out his or her good as the good of his or her whole life, but also in sustaining those traditions which provide both practices and individual lives with their necessary historical context. (MacIntyre, 
\i After Virtue
\i0  223%)\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\li720\pardirnatural

\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 The notion of a detachable self, divorced from past and from community is not the real self. Rather, each of us belongs by nature to a family (via genetics) and a culture. Furthermore, it is very often in social institutions (clubs, churches, schools, guilds, towns) that practices are learned, taught, preserved, extended. Injustice, cowardice, \'93corrupt traditions\'94 (223%). The persuasive examples are those of a present day black American whose identity is in part defined by the relationship of 18th century blacks to 18th century whites, or a present day Irishman whose identity is in part defined by the relationship of 18th century English to 18th century Irish. The if the notion of the detachable self were true, then my personal identity would have nothing to do with the trials and triumphs of those in the past; I could justly deny any part in pre-existing structures. \
	But thus far, by the first and second dimensions of his account of virtue, the account virtually begs to be read as a type of relativism: Is torture a practice? Is grand theft auto a practice that one can be excellent at? It certainly seems reasonable to think that some acquired qualities allow one to achieve the goods internal to car stealing. But MacIntyre denies being a relativist (
\i After Virtue, 
\i0  xii-xiii%). {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://1979F988-33BB-4A7C-A3B4-950B10F6DA85"}}{\fldrslt The full answer to the charge of relativism I detail below.}} For now, we only need to see how this objection forces MacIntyre to add the third layer or dimension to his account of virtue. He admits that there might be evil practices. We can add that institutions or traditions can be evil. If so, then some \'93virtues\'94 that enable the achievement of goods and the health and continuance of institutions would be bad qualities. So the account must do justice to the assumption that virtues are 
\i good 
\i0 for their possessor. \
	The third level, then, is the broadest \'97 that of humanity. Individuals and societies or social groups do not share much (anything?) but what we 
\i are 
\i0 as biological and psychological creatures. MacIntyre admits that defining virtues in terms of practices necessitates questioning whether life 
\i as a whole 
\i0 can be virtuous \'97 the virtue of \'93integrity or constancy\'85 of singleness of purpose in a whole life\'94 (203%). Integrity is not our telos, but it is a necessary condition. So, from this broadest view, even practices and institutions can be judged by how well they accord with our overall purpose, our overall life, and our overall nature.\
	As for human nature, human beings are practical reasoners; we are dependent, rational animals. That is what we are. And yes, we have 
\i natures. 
\i0 That word and that concept are not out-dated, outmoded, irrelevant, obsolete, unscientific, or any other such slur. Biologically, we are animals evolved from simpler animals (MacIntyre 1999, p.x). And we are practical reasoners (more on that below). We are in a position to see how MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue works. We find ourselves in a tradition (or more than one). Within that, we find ourselves engaging in practices. We engage in some of these practices inside, and others outside, institutions. Virtues are those 
\i skills 
\i0 that enable us to perform the practice excellently; virtues are also those skills and habits
\i  
\i0 by which we perform various social roles excellently; but finally virtues are those qualities by which we aim our practices toward an excellent 
\i human 
\i0 life, and by which we integrate our various social roles toward human ends. For instance, the most general virtuous qualities contribute to the flourishing of human being 
\i qua 
\i0 practical reasoner. The practice of practical reasoning is a universal human practice. The \'93human nature\'94 that is universally distributed across each member of our species is the capacity (sometimes unrealized) to become practical reasoners. This  makes sense of why educational institutions (as one example) are so important. Without them, virtues \'97 and the goods open to the virtuous \'97 are liable to remain unavailable to many. \
	So much for a summary of MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue. Some further comments are needed to fill out the relationship of virtue to eudaemonia. Talk of human nature and telos are inseparable. For MacIntyre, the loss of telos (human-nature-as-it-should-be) is one of the chief if not 
\i the 
\i0 chief error of Enlightenment moralities. Human-nature-as-it-is is a topic for both philosophers and social scientists: psychologists, sociologists, anthropologists, etc. But telos unifies human nature as it is with ethical principles and realistic ideals by which we can become something other than what we are at present. \'93To travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive\'94 and yet a having in mind a clear telos is a precondition for traveling hopefully. \
	MacIntyre\'92s provisional conception of our human telos is this: 
\i  
\i0 \'93The good life for man is the life spent in seeking for the good life for man, and the virtues necessary for the seeking are those which will enable us to understand what more and what else the good life for man is\'94 (210). Our telos is to be free to pursue our telos. MacIntyre is not a eudaemonist. At least, he is not obviously a straightforward eudaemonist; this conception of the human telos is more vague than Aristotle\'92s or Aquinas\'92s. Perhaps it is only provisional because it is so extremely indeterminate. How could it be made more determinate? The virtues needed to preserve the quest for the good, he suggests, may illumine \'93what else\'94 our telos consists in.  \
	This essentially historicist view of human life is key to MacIntyre\'92s virtue theory. To see why, we need to think about narrative. In the minds of many contemporaries, human life is broken into isolate stages (childhood, adolescence, old age, etc.). The human self is isolated from its present community and from its position in relation to the past. By contrast, MacIntyre\'92s synoptic vision of human life is 
\i narrative 
\i0 (see especially 
\i After Virtue, 
\i0 Chp. 15%). Human life is a unity, from birth to death (for individuals) and from emergence to dissolution (for groups and traditions). A human social group is a unity of members, more like an organism than  just an aggregate of atoms.  Narrative is not \'93disguise or decoration\'94 but an essential feature of the working of our minds and (arguably) an essential feature of the unfolding of reality through time. Narrative is not only a way of telling ourselves intelligible stories about what has happened, but is the very stuff of life. \
	The end of our narrative (the terminus) is, of course, individual death. But narratives also have an 
\i end 
\i0 (goal). He says, \'93We live out our lives, both individually and in our relationships with each other, in the light of certain conception of a possible shared future, a future in which certain possibilities beckon us forward and others repel us, some seem already foreclosed and others perhaps inevitable\'94 (215%) The unity of that narrative lies not only in our identity as a central character of our story, and our place in larger narrative contexts, but in the single 
\i telos 
\i0 governing all the moments of our \'93quest.\'94 Of course, quests do not always achieve their object. The narrative of human life always reaches its 
\i end 
\i0 (in death) but doesn\'92t always reach its 
\i end
\i0  (in success, achievement of telos). But to see our whole life synoptically requires seeing it as a narrative. \
	With this in mind, the relation between virtue and telos comes more clearly to light. Since not only individual agents but whole communities and institutions (and the whole human race!) are aimed at a telos, the presence of virtues sustains practices and traditions. The
\i  absence 
\i0 of the relevant virtues \'93weakens and destroys\'94 practices and whole traditions (223%). The absence of the higher level virtues, weakens and destroys the generically human goods: minimally, the freedom to pursue our telos. MacIntyre says: \'93The virtues therefore are to be understood as those dispositions which will not only sustain practices and enable us to achieve the goods internal to practices, but which will also sustain us in the relevant kind of quest for the good, by enabling us to overcome the charms, dangers, temptations and distractions which we encounter, and which will furnish us with increasing self-knowledge and increasing knowledge of the good\'94 (219%). The \'93quest for the good\'94 is necessary but not sufficient. It is good, and it cannot be completed without relevant virtues. And yet there is more to the good. So that first provisional conception of telos as indeterminate may be right. For if a person or community could secure the freedom to pursue their telos, they could secures an ethical and political space within which to develop higher-order virtues \
	These higher-order virtues are the context for and hence limit and guide the other lower-order virtues. Still further, social and political virtues are also the context, limit, and guide to individual virtues. Social and political virtues are \'93required to sustain the kind of households and the kind of political communities in which men and women can seek for the good together and the virtues necessary for philosophical enquiry about the character of the good\'94 (219). \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Dependent Rational Animals
\b0 \
	This summary has, so far, kept itself mostly to 
\i After Virtue,
\i0  only alluding to other works in the 
\i \'93After Virtue 
\i0 Project.
\i \'94 
\i0 I would like now to continue the story by summarizing 
\i Dependent Rational Animals 
\i0 before turning to a few objections and making my own positive contributions to our developing account. \
	The project of 
\i Dependent Rational Animals 
\i0 is to insist that (a) human beings 
\i are 
\i0 animals even if we are animals of a particular and unusual sort; and that (b) our dependence and vulnerability are 
\i as morally important
\i0  as our independence, our autonomy and self-sufficiency. There are virtues of both dependence and autonomy. The book also contends that (c) certain social arrangements are conducive to the transmission and sustenance of both kinds of virtue.  \
	Let\'92s examine a few quotations on each of these themes. Regarding (a), MacIntyre argues at length that the human differentia (be it language, reason, practical reason, self-consciousness, or what have you) does not eradicate or overshadow the commonalities between us and other animals. \'93I shall contend that although our differences from all other species are certainly of crucial importance, it is also important that both initially in our earliest childhood activities and to some extent thereafter we comport ourselves towards the world in much the same way as other intelligent animals. Indeed our ability to transcend those limitations depends in part upon certain of those animal characteristics among them the nature of our identity\'94 (MacIntyre 1999, 8%).  Regarding (b), he argues that vulnerability, dependence, affliction characteristic especially of early childhood and old age, but also of any sickness, injury, or misfortune are highly morally significant.  As he says he \'93virtues of independent rational agency need for their adequate exercise to be accompanied by what I shall call the virtues of acknowledge dependence and that a failure to understand this is apt to secure some features of rational agency. Moreover both sets of virtues are needed in order to actualize the distinctive potentialities they're specific to the human rational animal. Identifying how do while they are needed is a prerequisite for understanding their central place in the kind of human life through which human flourishing can be achieved.\'94 (Op. Cit.). Finally, regarding (c), MacIntyre argues that \'93me there in the modern state north of modern family can supply that kind of political and social Association is needed\'94 (9%). \
\

\b Objections
\b0 \
	Objections to MacIntyre\'92s theorizing come in many forms. A first objection is that his historicism relativizes ethical theory. A second is that his tradition-constituted definition of rationality is self-contradictory. \
	Defenders of the \'93tradition-less tradition\'94 of modern liberalism in various forms object to his outright rejection of liberalism. A Kantian or utilitarian can defend his favored rational, secular morality. Also, postmodern philosophers agree with his critique of liberalism but choose, in a word, Nietzsche over Aristotle. \
\

\b Take-Aways (Introduction)\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 	While I agree with much of MacIntyre\'92s picture of the development of western civilization, the thesis I would like to extract, develop, and defend is this: human practices are necessarily end-directed (teleological). \'93Social teleology\'94 has at least two and possibly three aspects: individual, collective, and human. The first aspect is the end-directed behavior of each agent; the second is the end-directed behavior of social groups, like families, nations, clubs, congregations, and so on. The third, and most objectionable, aspect, is the end-directed activity of our species as a whole. What, if anything, does 
\i every human being 
\i0 intentionally pursue? \
	Let\'92s provide some names to summarize these notions: \

\i 	Human Practical Teleology  Thesis
\i0 : Persons, when we act rationally, act for a reason or reasons and toward some end. \

\i 	Group Practical Teleology Thesis
\i0 : Groups, when we act rationally, act for reasons and toward some end(s). \

\i 	Human Natural Teleology Thesis. 
\i0 Insofar as an agent is a human, that agent acts for a reason, both as an individual and in social groups. \
	In the next chapter, I shall defend one version of the more controversial and less popular 
\i Natural Teleology Thesis
\i0 : At least some parts of nature (that is, non-human nature) are necessarily end-directed. But more on that later. \
	To defend social teleology we have to point out what phenomena up for explanation, and clarify why social teleological explanations are the best. That I shall attempt in the first section. In the second section, I tackle an important piece of this defense: a defense of the very notion of a human nature. Finally, if there is such a thing as human nature, then it is reasonable to query whether human nature is part of \'93nature\'94 as a whole \'97 what is our relationship to 
\i the rest 
\i0 of nature? A very old and very widespread belief is that humans are sui generis and somehow \'93special.\'94 Is this belief mistaken, a superstition, an instance of magic-thinking, a holdover from pre-Darwinian  or pre-scientific thinking? I tackle these questions in the third section. \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Take Away I - Social Teleology\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i\b0 \cf0 To defend social teleology we have to point out what phenomena up for explanation, and clarify why social teleological explanations are the best. That I shall attempt in the first section. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i0 \cf0 \
Consider as explananda the following phenomena: \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	A.	}A man goes to the gym to get fit for his film role; a woman delivers a speech to capture key approval ratings in Iowa;\
{\listtext	B.	}The NRA pushes a concealed-carry bill to allow licensed guns to cross state lines; the U.N. pushes for a universal climate agreement to organize climate action across international borders; \
{\listtext	C.	}All human beings pursue survival; all humans want power;\
{\listtext	D.	}A deer flees a predatory to survive; a turtle walks ashore to lay her eggs. \
{\listtext	E.	}The heart pumps blood to oxygenate the body; the optical photoreceptors converting light signals to electricity to produce sight;\
{\listtext	F.	}A piece of ice melts at 33 degrees Fahrenheit; the sunlight streams through the atmosphere to make the plants grow; \
{\listtext	G.	}After the Big Bang, giant molecular clouds collapse into solar systems which eventually form planets upon which organic life can possibly come about. \
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 Each of these phenomena are 
\i actions 
\i0 or 
\i motions 
\i0 that take place over time and toward an end. The first three statements (A)-(C) refer to human actions; the last four (D)-(G) refer to putative end-directed motions or actions of non-human organisms (D), of organic systems (E), of inorganic matter and energy on earth (F), and of cosmic matter and energy  (G). Motions (D)-(G) are sometimes called 
\i teleonomical 
\i0 phenomena. This name is fine so far as it goes. Teleonomy is supposed to distinguish the categorical of 
\i intentional 
\i0 end-directed activity to 
\i apparently 
\i0 or 
\i mechanically 
\i0 end-directed activity. I prefer to distinguish between 
\i intentional 
\i0 teleological phenomena from 
\i non-intentional 
\i0 teleological phenomena, since these categories do not prejudge against the conclusion that, say, the survival-enhancing instincts of deer are teleological. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Take Aways II - Human Nature
\i\b0 \
In the second section, I tackle an important piece of this defense: a defense of the very notion of a human nature. \
	
\i0 Sarte famously taught that human beings have no inherent nature. There are no \'93built-in\'94 limits to what we can do and become. We create ourselves 
\i ex nihilo. \
	
\i0 As I understand the term, a nature refers to just about the same entity as another important (and highly contentious) modern term: species. A nature is a formal property or cluster of formal properties that define a given thing. To say that \'93chairs have legs 
\i by nature
\i0 \'94 is to say that chairs by virtue of being 
\i what they are 
\i0 have four legs (which may be false). To say that bucks have horns is to identify a formal property all bucks share. \
	Theories of 
\i human
\i0  nature give various weights to biological, psychological, intellectual, and spiritual properties of human beings. All humans are rational animals; all humans are images of God; all humans are rational, social animals; humans are highly evolved animals of the species 
\i homo sapiens sapiens; 
\i0 all \
	A nature defines what a thing is across time. An acorn is not an oak tree \'97 not a mature oak tree yet \'97 but an acorn has the same nature as the mature oak tree. 
\i \
	
\i0 Natures are discovered more or less empirically. We examine tendencies of a given organism and infer to such-and-such a nature. The posited nature is a formal cause that explains those tendencies. \
	On my view, human nature is a discernible form defined by a set of biological and psychological properties. 
\i \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Take Aways III - Nature and Human Nature\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i\b0 \cf0 Finally, if there is such a thing as human nature, then it is reasonable to query whether human nature is part of \'93nature\'94 as a whole \'97 what is our relationship to the rest of nature? A very old and very widespread belief is that humans are sui generis and somehow \'93special.\'94 Is this belief mistaken, a superstition, an instance of magic-thinking, a holdover from pre-Darwinian  or pre-scientific thinking? I tackle these questions in the third section. \
\
\
}