{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 3. The Moral of the Story \'97 Returning to First-Order Debates to See what a difference a definition makes\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Theoretical Reason is also normative\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\i 	\'93There is, however, a different way of understanding the contrast between practical and theoretical reason, stressing the parallels rather than the differences between the two forms of reflection. According to this interpretation, theoretical reflection too is concerned with a normative rather than a factual question, namely with the question of what one ought to believe. It attempts to answer this normative question by assessing and weighing reasons for belief, the considerations that speak for and against the particular conclusions one might draw about the way the world is. Furthermore, it does this from a standpoint of first-personal reflection: the stance of theoretical reasoning in this sense is the committed stance of the believer, not the stance of detached contemplation of one's beliefs themselves (Moran 2001). Seen in this way, the contrast between practical and theoretical reason is essentially a contrast between two different systems of norms: those for the regulation of action on the one hand, and those for the regulation of belief on the other.\'94
\f1\i0\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\i\fs28 R. Jay Wallace, \'93Practical Reason\'94.
\f1\i0\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\i\fs28  \

\i0 \
If this is so, then the realm of 
\i normativity 
\i0 just is the realm of 
\i rationality. 
\i0 And I believe it is so. The reader must decide if the reasons for thinking all this is so.  I for one follow the argument and conclude that the realm of normativity is the realm of rationality (both theoretical and practical). \
\
\

\b Normativity includes but is not limited to 
\i morality\

\i0\b0 If the fundamental puzzle behind puzzles about morality (whether moral facts exist, whether moral knowledge is the same as other kinds of knowledge, whether moral terms refer, whether moral considerations are necessarily motivating) is a puzzle about 
\i normativity 
\i0 then those philosophers (like me) who are playing the metaethical game have to get into the metanormativity game. \

\b \
An objection
\b0 \
One worry might be that expanding conversations about morality to include 
\i all of normativity 
\i0 might explode the conversation beyond unwieldy limits.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 James Lenman suggested as much to me in a personal correspondence.
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  Moral and especially metaethical conversations are already expansive and complicated enough, one might object (with more than a hint of exasperation). While I am sympathetic to this worry, the change I am arguing we ought to make is not a just change in scope (and therefore size) of the conversation; it is a change in qualitative classification. If we fail to make the change, the result will not be accounts of manageable size but incorrect accounts. Moral questions 
\i just are 
\i0 normative questions; one\'92s moral theory cannot coherently discriminate between \'93moral normativity\'94 and \'93non-moral normativity\'94, giving one explanation for moral reality, knowledge, and language but giving an unrelated or contrasting explanation for other kinds of normativity (rational or aesthetic). But that is just what Boyd and Gibbard do.  \
\

\b Kant\

\b0 Now, I do not consider myself a Kantian. Kant is one of those philosophers, like Plato and Aquinas, where it\'92s hard to know what to do with him unless you take him as your master. It\'92s hard to know how to agree with this or that particular thesis, how to even understand the terms of the thesis, without being obliged to untangle nested web of connected theses, terms, and doctrines. As an example of what I mean, Kant (as I read him) avers that reason judges (and in part constructs) reality, while practical reason produces laws and maxims. Insofar as Kant argues that practical reason exists, I agree with him. He also argues that practical reason is free, and that we can somehow know that God and immortality exist because freedom exists and morality. It is not a critique of Kant\'92s philosophy to say I can\'92t follow it \'97 it is a critique of myself. But I can\'92t follow all that. \
\
Regardless, for Kant, practical reason is the realm of moral law and also freedom. That much (if I follow it) I agree with. We only deliberate about what to do because it is not determined (in precise detail) ahead of time what we will do. And we are free to do wrong, that is, we can elect for irrational action. Of course, irrational action is by definition not free, not in accord with law. So we cannot act both irrationally and freely. We can only act freely by acting rationally. And we can only act rationally by acting in accord with maxims we can will universally. \
\

\b The thing to do is the good thing\

\b0 Reducing \'93goodness\'94 to a merely \'93moral\'94 sense inevitably gives rise to puzzles about internalism and externalism regarding motivation. \'93X is wrong, but should I do it anyway?\'94 \'93Y is good, but I don\'92t 
\i want 
\i0 to do it.\'94\
But the \'93good\'94 is, according to Socrates\'92 dictum just by definition that for the sake of which we perform every action. \
\
\

\b The conclusion
\b0 \
Regardless of the relation of my thesis to Kant\'92s overall critical idealism. I think the lesson is that when we are looking for 
\i reasons 
\i0 we might find reasons to think p and not to think that f 
\i or
\i0  reasons to \uc0\u966  and not to \u960 .  That is because normativity (the realm of \'93oughts\'94) just is the realm of rationality (the realm of reasons). If this is right, metaethics will stall until we learn this lesson. }