{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b \cf0 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	Is virtue talk a better fit for theism or atheism? Do we have to assume God exists? (No God Objection)\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 	There is one final question we need to ask of MacIntyre: is virtue talk inherently theistic? \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Secular Virtue Theory in Anscombe and MacIntyre
\b0 \
MacIntyre in conversation with Anscombe poses for us this question: is a secular, rational, metaethical account of virtue possible? Anscombe proposes a return to virtue talk to 
\i solve 
\i0 the problem for non-theists that concept of absolute moral obligation presupposes an absolutely obligatory divine law. Yet MacIntyre proposes a return to virtue talk and to a whole \'93tradition\'94 of virtue theory in which theism has played a large part, not only for Aquinas but for Aristotle as well.
\f2 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0 That theism is important for Aristotle is a case I make in a later chapter. %
\f2 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0  Which is it? And why are these two \'97 both Roman Catholics \'97 the one\'92s asking such questions? \
\
MacIntyre\'92s historical analysis demonstrates that the Aristotelian tradition was a more or less self-contained tradition that was able to be appropriated by the late antiquity and early medieval tradition of Christianity. The Christian (Aquinas) and Jewish (Maimonides) and Muslim (Ibn Roschd) writers appropriated these scheme but did not fundamentally alter it when they placed it within a theistic context. The telos of human nature became not merely earthly but heavenly (and also earthly) since ultimate happiness begins here but is fulfilled in the hereafter. And the precepts of rational morality were baptized as not only rational but divine laws. But these modifications were more augmentations than alterations. \

\b \
\
\
Objection about religious knowledge or divine revelation\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 It may be objected that religious writers include a fourth source: divine revelation. If this is your objection and you are not religious, you may view this fourth alleged source with suspicion; if this is your objection and you are religious, you may view my omission of this fourth source with suspicion. \
My response is this: supposing that God exists, we can classify his moral directives under the heading of (b), instruction from moral exemplars. Whether the nature of the exemplar \'97 divine or human \'97 makes a difference in kind is a question I shall here leave aside.\
\
}