{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red20\green20\blue20;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc4\levelnfcn4\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{lower-alpha\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid2\'02\'01.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	1.	}What is a virtue? A quality that enables and in part constitutes happiness. \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	a.	}It seems that a virtue is a human quality that contributes to the greatest happiness for the greatest number. (Hurka)\
{\listtext	b.	}It seems that virtue is a quality that enables a person within a tradition of achieving the goods internal to a practice. (MacIntyre). \
{\listtext	c.	}It seems that a virtue is a trait that benefits its possessor (Hursthouse).\
{\listtext	d.	}It seems that a virtue is a trait of any animal that helps it achieve the lifeform of a species (Foot?)\
{\listtext	e.	}
\f1\fs34 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
It seems that a virtue is a trait such that, whatever else is true of those among whom we live, it is better if they have it (Thomson 1997, 282).
\f0\fs28 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	2.	}What is happiness? Eudaemonia, an indeterminate concept but minimally the actualization of our human nature\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	a.	}It seems that happiness is pleasure (Mill). \
{\listtext	b.	}It seems that happiness is perfection of nature (George). \
{\listtext	c.	}It seems that happiness does not exist for animals (Brown). \
{\listtext	d.	}It seems that happiness is survival, reproduction, characteristic pleasure, and communal flourishing (Hursthouse).\
{\listtext	e.	}It seems that happiness is deep satisfaction with one\'92s life (Foot). But it\'92s not (Annas). \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	3.	}What is phronesis? The master virtue, a meta-virtue guiding all the other virtues. \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}It seems that practical wisdom is merely a procedural effectiveness. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	4.	}Is virtue ethics realistic (if so, constructivist or stance-independent)? Yes, since they are grounded in human nature and nature.\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}It seems that virtue talk can be nihilist or non-cognitivist. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	5.	}What do evaluative terms mean? They mean what they seem to mean: they pick out normative facts.\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}It seems that evaluative terms express rather than (aim to) describe. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	6.	}Is normativity natural? Yes. \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}It seems that nature is non-normative (Brown?).\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}It seems that 
\i only 
\i0 human nature is normative (McDowell). \
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}It seems that Darwinism proves that teleology is false. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	7.	}Why by virtuous? Because it is rational and good. Because it is already who we are, but we can fail to be who we are, which is by definition undesirable. \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}It seems that we should be virtuous in order to be happy; and everyone wants happiness, so everyone wants virtue (Brown).\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}It seems that we should be virtuous because it is the right thing to do (Kant?)\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}It seems that we should be virtuous because it produces the best consequences (Hurka? Adams?)\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	8.	}How do we know what is virtuous to do or be? We look at exemplars, and compare them with self-evident moral and practical and rational norms we cannot but endorse.\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}It seems that we know what is virtuous by looking at the ideal agent (Hursthouse)\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx1680\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}It seems that we aim for reflective equilibrium (Boyd). \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	9.	}What is human nature? A subset of nature, dependent rational animals. \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}Just hunks of meat (Ruse; Rosenburg)\
{\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}Gods (Adams?)\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	10.	}Is virtue incompatible with atheism? A better fit for theism, but is compatible with atheism.\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li1440\fi-1440\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	
\f2 \uc0\u8259 
\f0 	}It seems that virtue is incompatible with atheism. \
}