{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\})}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00);}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\})}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'02\'00);}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\})}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'02\'00);}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid5}
{\list\listtemplateid6\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\})}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid501\'02\'00);}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid6}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}{\listoverride\listid6\listoverridecount0\ls6}}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
What is a virtue? And what does virtue talk do for ethical theory? This dissertation answers that virtue talk is indispensable for our ethical theorizing and for our ethical 
\i living, 
\i0 because we all have an interest and obligation in becoming fully human, being happy; and because the moral (and more broadly practical) standards or norms that fix what is right and wrong, admirable and despicable, are real, fundamental features of reality, like the laws of physics and mathematics. \
\
Virtue talk is an old phenomenon. And though words like \'93virtue\'94 along with \'93honor\'94 fell out of fashion for a bit, they are back in fashion and in force. But objections and clarifying questions loom large. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 Darwell\'92s essay argues that metaethics (or analytic ethics or critical ethics) is best practiced within a dynamic union with normative ethics. (The combination of the two, Darwall suggests, might be called 
\i philosophical 
\i0 ethics.) Not only was this how Moore approached ethics in 1903, but it is how many contemporary writers are approaching ethics, despite the trend in the middle of the century to write 
\i either 
\i0 about metaethical issues or ignore them for the sake of normative ethical ones. \
\
I take my task to be to advance anglophone virtue ethics but to do so by virtue of addressing head on some of the most pressing, most challenging, and (to me at least) most interesting objections and questions. Objections come from opponents and questions from often confused bystanders.  \
\
In one sense, the normative ethical content of virtue ethics is simple: go become virtuous. There is much more to it than that. But virtue education tries to instill virtues in children; virtue politics tries to create polities in which it is \'93easy to be good\'94 and politicians who are scrupulous, upstanding, wise, honest, and trustworthy; virtue epistemology tries to show what character traits are necessary or beneficial or sufficient for being the kind of person who can know things. And so on. \
\
But then the questions begin: which traits are virtues? What do you mean by \'93virtuous\'94? Is there really happiness? \
\
Many of the objections and questions for virtue ethical writers like MacIntyre, Foot, Hursthouse, and McDowell are objections and questions with correlates outside of virtue ethics. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
The key questions in short are these: \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 THE KEY QUESTIONS\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	1.	}What is a virtue? \
{\listtext	2.	}What is happiness?\
{\listtext	3.	}What is phronesis?\
{\listtext	4.	}Why by virtuous? \
{\listtext	5.	}Is virtue ethics a species of metaethical realism (if so, constructivist or stance-independent)? \
{\listtext	6.	}What do evaluative terms mean? (Non-Cognitivism Challenge)\
{\listtext	7.	}How do we know what is virtuous to do or be? (Moral Disagreement Objection)\
{\listtext	8.	}Is normativity natural? Is nature normative or teleological? (No Natural Teleology Objection)\
{\listtext	9.	}What is human nature?  Is there a human nature? (No Human Nature Objection)\
{\listtext	10.	}What is rationality? (No Sui Generis Rationality Objection)\
{\listtext	11.	}Is virtue talk a better fit for theism or atheism?  (No God Objection)\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
But each question allows for a variety of sub-questions. \
\
VIRTUE, HAPPINESS, REASON - EXPLICATION OF POSITIVE THOERY\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 1. What is a virtue? \
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 	A practice? (MacIntyre 1984)\
	Do they benefit their possessor? \
	Virtue and right action\
	Being for and Excellence\
	Is morality rational or emotional or both? (Hursthouse 1999).\
	Are virtues united, or plural?\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 2. What is happiness and its relation to virtue?\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 	Is it different from flourishing?\
	Is happiness normative?\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 3. What is practical reason and its relation to virtue? (Substantive reason vs. Instrumental reason)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 	Adams gives up the idea that practical wisdom is the heart of virtues (2006)\
	Kamketar objects (2010). \
	How does the  normativity of moral virtues relate to the normativity of epistemic virtues? Are epistemic norms (that lead to intellectual virtue) relevantly similar to moral norms (that lead to moral virtue)?\
	Does our account of reason 
\i explain 
\i0 our norms or 
\i vindicate 
\i0 them?\
	What is normativity\'92s relation to rationality?\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://ACDCBA5C-3F30-4BE0-89AB-E2A7AF7DA002"}}{\fldrslt \cf0 	Plan-making? (Gibbard 2008) \
4. Why by virtuous? \
}}\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 	Is the pursuit of virtue egoistic? (Hursthouse 1999; Adams 2006)\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 	Are virtue-norms sufficiently action guiding to be useful? (Hursthouse 1999)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 	Are moral reasons necessarily motivating?  (Moral internalism v. Externalism) (Shafer-Landau 2003)\
	Are practical reasons necessarily motivation? (Reasons internalism) (Shafer-Landau 2003)\
	Is there reason to be altruistic? (Adams 2006)\
	Is there reason to care for animals, and the environment? \
\
OBJECTIONS PERTAINING TO REALISM (chapter 1)\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 5. Is virtue ethics a species of realism? (MacIntyre)
\b0 	Could there be virtue expressivism? (Cognitivism) (Shafer-Landau)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 	Or is it idealism? (Hursthouse) (chapter 2)\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 OBJECTIONS PERTAINING TO ETHICAL NATURALISM AND NON-NATURALISM\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 10. What kinds of facts are virtues? Natural facts? Human attributes?\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 	Two Supervenient Challenges from Shafer-Landau\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
OBJECTIONS PERTAINING TO LANGUAGE AND NORMATIVITY (chapter 2)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://5623CAB1-2700-45FE-A87B-7151ECA07B99"}}{\fldrslt 
\b \cf0 5. What do evaluative terms about virtue (courage, moderation) mean? \
}}\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 	Do they semantically refer? (Tannsjo 2010)\
	Are they functional concepts (Foot 2002)\
		 \
OBJECTIONS PERTAINING TO MORAL KNOWLEDGE\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://0508ADE9-0494-4D62-B192-36E3FF9BE684"}}{\fldrslt 
\b \cf0 7. How do we know what is good or what ought to be? (Shafer-Landau 2003, Part Five)\
}}\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 	Which list of virtues is justifiable as 
\i really the virtues? \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i0 \cf0 	How do we know (if we do) which habitual actions or character traits are virtues? (Moral foundationalism v. Coherentism)\
	Specifically, how might we adjudicate disagreements between cultures or individuals over the value of particular traits (humility, celibacy, assertiveness, callousness)?\
	Is ethics a science? By the way, is science just the hard sciences, the natural sciences, or any systematic discipline of knowledge? \
	 If humans have evolved, does that debunk rationality?\
\

\i \
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\i0 \cf0 OBJECTIONS PERTAINING TO NORMATIVITY\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 	Is nature normative?  Moore opens up the discussion for a cosmic rather than merely human perspective when he includes the beauty of nature. This cosmological perspective is welcome.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Panayot Butchvarov, \'93Ethics Dehumanized\'94 in 
\i Metaethics After Moore.
\i0  %
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  Human beings need not and ought not occupy \'93center stage\'94 of our ethical thinking.\
\

\i \

\i0 OBJECTIONS PERTAINING TO ANTHROPOLOGY\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://02A36E7F-5135-4390-AF87-0EF481969F30"}}{\fldrslt 
\b \cf0 9. 	What is human nature?  Is there a human nature? (No Human Nature Objection)\
 (McDowell 1996)\
}}\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 	Are we animals? (George \
	Are we different from animals (Brown 2008)?\
	Are we \'93social animals\'94? \
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	Are humans essential rational?\'a0\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 	Are we supernatural?\
	Have humans evolved or not?\
	Can this question be answered from \'93outside\'94 from a 3
\fs18 \super rd
\fs28 \nosupersub  person perspective, (from cosmology, Darwinian biology, psychology, anthropology) or only from the \'93inside\'94 (in light of our own first-personal view of ourselves from introspection and from reflection within our society, culture, religious experience, friendships, and family)? \
	{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://3C37BE9F-6B77-473E-88C6-E4340765613B"}}{\fldrslt 
\b Are there such things as character traits? (Doris 1998; Harman 1999).\
}}	How do they belong to Bill rather than Ted? How is a virtue mine? (Smith 2003)\
	Does moral luck determine your virtue? (Harper says this was the view of the ancient world.)\
\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf0 10. What is rationality? No Sui Generis Rationality Objection\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\
OBJECTIONS PERTAINING TO THEISM, NATURALISM\
12. Is virtue talk better conceived within naturalism or theism?\
	Is nature normative and teleological? Moral naturalism v. Non-naturalism (metaphysics)\
	Are all living beings normative?\
	\'93A major battlefield of contemporary discussion concerns the question how such philosophical key notions as [these]: Self, Subjectivity, First person perspective, Moral values, Content, Free will. Can be accommodated in a naturalistic outlook of reality.\'94 (
\i How Successful Is Naturalism?
\i0  
\i 7). \

\i0 Is Neo-Aristotelianism broadly naturalistic? It seems so, it seems not.\
Even supposing that neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics is naturalistic, how are we to understand \'93natural properties\'94? Even grounding moral facts in facts about human nature, how are we to understand nature? Is nature teleological? Is there such thing as \'93natural normativity\'94?\
Are humans divine? (Aristotle)\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl0\cf0 Is virtue ethics an alternative to theistic (divine law) ethics, or another version of it? (Anscombe)\
Is a secular content-full morality possible in virtue ethics? (Engelhard)\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 11. Are values \'91queer\'92, discontinuous? (Shafer-Landau, Mackie)\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0\cf0 \
The answers to these questions will be developed out of an analysis of MacIntyre, Foot, McDowell, Hursthouse, Brown, and Adams. }