{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl264\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ---\
author:     Keith Buhler\
title:      Paper 2\
class:      Metaethics \
teacher: Anita Superson\
semester: Fall 2015\
---\
\
**Response to Christine Korsgaard, \'93The Authority of Reflection\'94**\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl264\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 ## Introduction\
## Thesis \
ource of obligation" and that "we have *moral* obligations... to humanity as such" (93).[^1]\
## Arguments\
### Autonomy is a source of obligation because we are reflective, accountable, have a self-conception, and have a \'93practical identity.\'94\
So how can autonomy be a source of obligation for us qua human? Korsgaard\'92s answer is that our autonomy is the inevitable responsibility to set laws for our own practical actions and that such laws are authoritative for us. To justify this answer, a three observations are needed:  we as humans are *reflective*, we are *accountable*, and we have a *moral identity*. Let\'92s consider each in turn.\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl264\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 Korsgaard takes as axiomatic that "the human mind is self-conscious" (93). We have conscious mental states about the world; we also have mental states *about* our mental states. Call this *being reflective.*. \
Reflective agents like us are confronted "the problem of normativity." That is, we have the power (and therefore responsibility) of questioning our own actions and thoughts. We can and must hold ourselves *accountable*. We can and must demand justification for our actions. We can and must hold others accountable for their actions. Call this being *accountable*.\
Also, reflective agents have a self-conception. In fact, we *have to* have a self-conception. The self-conception we have arises when "I" reflect on "myself", when I see myself as double, both the image in the mirror and the eyeballs looking at the mirror. The fact that we have a self-conception grounds the possibility of obligation and authority over myself by bifurcating the unitary self into the \'93thinking self\'94 and the \'93acting self.\'94 The thinking self cannot but regulate the acting self; the acting self cannot be be obligated to comply with those regulations. \
Reflectivity, accountability, and practical identity can be defined in terms of *reasons*. For example, suppose an agent desires to buy a new car. She then *reflects* on the desire: is there good reason to make the purchase or good reason to forestall that desire until later? When she has adequately been *accountable* for her decision by giving adequate reasons to herself, she acts. (Suppose, in this case, she waits on the purchase.) She is the kind of financially responsible person who does not waste money needlessly. Her action to wait on the big purchase expresses a practical identity. This example, I hope, shows why Korsgaard says \'94\'92Reason' means reflective success" (94). To have a reason is to be in a position to *satisfy* the demands of accountability. And thus "reflective structure of human consciousness gives us authority over ourselves" (105). \
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\sl264\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 I need to say more about the notion of practical identities. This is the part of Korsgaard\'92s case that I find most interesting but also least clear. As I see it, her point is that we have many identities (human being, father, teacher, etc.) and that each defines certain practical activities.  But we also have a moral identity *as humans.* Humans "need to have practical conceptions of our identity in order to act and live" (106).  The fact is, we do act and live. Therefore we do have a moral identity. Korsgaard's argument she classifies as "transcendental" in this way. That we have a moral identity is something true we discover only upon reflection on our actual living and acting. Put another way, she says: \'93Rational action is possible only if human beings find their own humanity to be valuable\'94 (104). \
Our self-conception "identifies us with the source of ... reasons. In this way, it makes us laws to ourselves" (100). Your identity is "a description under which you value yourself" (96). To really *be* a teacher (say) I must fulfill certain minimal obligations (grading student papers, respond to emails, show up to class). Korsgaard calls the person who lives up to his or her own standards a person with "integrity." Without integrity, the person *splits* into disunity. If I fail to live up to the obligations of being a teacher, I lose that part of my identity. \
But my identity as teacher is not the core of my moral identity -- the core of my moral identity is something more like my self-conception *as human being*. If my obligations qua human conflict with my obligations qua teacher, humanity will trump education. And if I fail to live up to my obligations qua human being, I lose my identity *tout court.* She says, "an obligation always takes the form of a reaction against a threat of a loss of identity" (97). Again, she says that some of our obligations arise simply from being human \'97 I.e., being reflective and therefore accountable and having a practical identity. \'93That we obligate ourselves is simply a fact about human nature\'85\'94 100). \
Korsgaard\'92s discussion is more detailed than my summary can follow. I cannot do justice to the other way of putting the same points (the points about being reflective and accountable) \'97 that we are free.[^2] Briefly, the will (which is for Kant practical reason) cannot be arbitrary \'97 lacking reasons \'97 nor can it be determined from \'93outside\'94, so it must be autonomous. Freedom, paradoxically, means obeying one\'92s own rules rather than obeying *no* rules or obeying the rules of another (God, the state, etc.). So Korsgaard endorses Kant\'92s notion that a categorical imperative \'97 a purely formal universal law \'97 is \'93the law of a free will\'94 (95). I hope this somewhat paradoxical point is now clear. \
Nor can I do justice to the distinction she makes between the categorical imperative and the moral law. It is an important distinction for the upshot is this: just being persuaded that I am obligated by the categorical imperative doesn\'92t show that I am obligated by the moral law (96). \
To complete Korsgaard\'92s case that autonomy (rule of self over self) is the source of moral obligation she requires the additional point that the law you take for yourself be the *moral* law (rather than say, the law of egoism). \
Korsgaard concludes on the basis of these reflections that the \'93realist objection \'97 that we need to explain why we must obey that legislator \'97 has been answered, for this is a legislator whose authority is beyond question and does not need to be established\'94 (98). A good maxim is one that we could will become a universal law. Good maxims, Korsgaard argues, are good in virtue of their formal or functional arrangement, their \'93internal structure\'94 (99). Strangely, she concedes that (in this sense) realism is true, for the it is the properties of the maxim that determine its status as a good reason. But then she quickly takes it back \'97 the epistemological point is that we discover what is a good reason by discovering *that we can endorse it*. \
To get to moral obligation, Korsgaard establishes a distinction between concepts and \'93conceptions.\'94 A concept like good is simply, by definition, a \'93name for what we are to strive for, aim at, and care about\'85\'94 while a *conception* of goodness falls out of our practical identity (100). An agent who takes up the standpoint of a citizen in the Kingdom of Ends gets out of that identity certain (substantive) conceptions of what she is to aim at. \
She simply asserts that convergence between \'93moral strangers\'94[@engelhardt1996foundations] on the need to have a view of what is right and good \'97 and the sometime convergence of specific views on the right and good \'97 is not due to a convergence \'93on an *external world* of objectively real values\'94 (101). \
Her conclusion is that contingent, local practical identities like those urged by communitarians are rooted in *the* human, moral identity. \'93Most of the time, our reasons for action spring from our more contingent and local identities. But part of the normative force of those reasons springs from the value we place on ourselves as human beings who need such identities\'94 (103). Humanity is to be valued for its own sake, and is implicitly valued in every other evaluation or evaluative reason for action. We can know our value only from *within* \'97 from \'93the standpoint of reflective consciousness\'94 (104). \
## Objections\
**External Standard Objection** It might seem that autonomy cannot be the source of obligation. For the commonsense notion of obligation follows this pattern: an NFL football player is obligated to follow the rules of the game. These standards he did not create. If he violates a standard on a whim or with a malicious intention, appropriate consequences will follow (fines, suspension, etc.). Similarly, physical laws are not created by any humans. I am not "obligated" to "obey" physical laws, but there is an analogy here. The standards are not of my (or anyone's) making, so we cannot change them to our whims or intentions. Physical laws can be *ignored* but ultimately not *violated* -- if I refuse to acknowledge the coffee table between me and the door, appropriate consequences will follow (bruised shin). Perhaps moral laws are a kind of blend of these two: like physical laws, they are not man-made but "external"; however, like game rules, they *can* be violated (with consequences). Moral laws are not "optional" in the sense that a rational agent can "opt out" of them while remaining a rational agent, but they are optional in that an agent can willfully violate them. \
**External Standard Objection Reply** %\
\'93The acting self concedes to the thinking self its right to government. And the thinking self, in turn, tries to govern as well as it can\'85 and it is a relation not of mere power but rather of *authority*\'94 (98).\
**Stable Identity Objection** Korsgaard's account of obligations that arise from autonomy shows that obligations get their teeth from loss of identity entailed by violating them. For obligations arising not just from assigned jobs or voluntary roles but to simple and ultimate humanity, the loss of identity is simple and ultimate too. An objection she considers is that violating our obligations qua human *does not* in fact result immediately in the loss of our human identity. "Identity...cant take a few knocks, and we know it" (97). \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl264\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 3. **Stable Identity Objection** %\
\
\
##### Citations\
[^1]: In-text citations in this paper refer to Korsgaard's "Authority of Reflection" in Shafer-Landau and Cuneo (eds), *Foundations of Ethics: An Anthology.* Blackwell, 2007.\
\
[^2]: We find ourselves free. Even if what Korsgaard calls "The Scientific Worldview" indicates that human beings are not free but only act on their strongest desire; rather, we recognize desires within ourselves, reflect upon them, and are accountable for sorting through them. }