{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ### Moral Education ####\
\
Often the biggest and most obvious facts are the hardest to see. For example, when I ask students to point out anything they see \'97 anything at all, hidden or apparent \'97  they typically look around and start naming medium-sized objects in their field of vision: this chair, that wall, that tree, that person, or perhaps those atoms and molecules, that sunlight. They never say the biggest and most obvious thing: the ground. \
\
When discussing the morality of adults, we often leave out the biggest and most obvious source of our morality. The source of our morality is not our professors in college, our ethics textbooks, our favorite novel, or even (for religious folk) our Holy Bible. The biggest and most obvious fact about our morality (and our moral psychology and a whole lot else) is our parents. \
\
Most of us grew up in the context of nuclear families. So our biological parent or parents both conceived, raised, cared for, and educated us \'97 including education in do\'92s and don\'92ts of life. \
\
The reason we must keep parents in mind is that the two most significant periods, in one sense of significance, of our ethical lives are the very beginning and the very end. \
\
The latter phase of human life, say, from 50-80 (for those who live that long) is the period in which our habits are most firmly established and the consequences of our choices are most apparent. There is a time delay between the decision to cultivate a character trait and the rewards (or punishments) of becoming that kind of person. \
\
The middle period (say, ages 25-55) are where we are most autonomous. We are fully functioning agents. We have projects, aims, goals, ethical principles (or a principled lack thereof), weaknesses, given temptations, vices, defects, as well as strengths, virtues, and a host of other habits we may call morally neutral. This is also the period when we philosophers tend to write books about morality. But just because this is the period in which moral philosophers write books about morality doesn\'92t mean this period is the most moral significant. \
\
There is a truism that all the really significant doctrines about life \'97 all the really impactful beliefs and habits \'97 we don\'92t learn in school; we learn them all by the time we 
\i enter
\i0  school (around age 5). We learn how to relate to other humans, how to relate to authority, how to speak our native language, we learn (for the most part, but not exclusively) what is valuable in life \'97 learning, money, position, friendship, power, and so on. }