{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## Virtue ##\
\
### MacIntyre\'92s Project: An Invitation to Restore Virtue ###\
\
The abiding theme of MacIntyre's ethical writings has been the invitation to give up on the hopeless elements of our modern liberal tradition and to return to Aristotelian (and Thomistic) tradition of virtue. This invitation assumes that our modern tradition is fatally flawed, that some parts at least are hopeless; and it assumes that the tradition of virtue will cure what ails. It also assume that moderns \'97 even putatively \'93anti-traditionalist\'94 moderns \'97 a part of a \'93tradition.\'94 I shall comment on both of these assumptions below. \
\
#### Audience\
\
MacIntyre\'92s ideal audience is "small farmers, fishermen (and women), schoolteachers who refuse to become bureaucratic functionaries, those who retain ideals of craftsmanship in manual or mental labor and members of cooperatives aimed at remedying hunger or homelessness."[@weinstein2003macintyre 8.] In other words, he writes to academics and to regular folks; to individuals and to communities. \
\
#### Influence\
\
MacIntyre's influence has been remarkable. Many have declined this invitation, but many have accepted it. Those who decline are more or less content with modern ethical and political thinking, offering corrections and improvements but not major overhaul; they find  MacIntyre's criticisms excessively polemical and his solutions needlessly radical. Those who accept tend to be more dissatisfied with the present modern culture, modern morality, and modern politics. \
\
### Philosophical Imagination\
\
The invitation to recover the virtues of the tradition of Aristotle (and Aquinas and others) is not a demand -- it really is an *invitation.* Readers who are discontent with modern culture and morality may well find MacIntyre's solutions compelling. Readers who are not so discontent may find something of interest in his criticisms; if not, they are invited to consider his solutions in a spirit of philosophical imagination. "*If* modern morality were a disaster... would this be a good solution?"\
\
###Assumption 1: We all have a tradition ###\
\
What is a tradition? An extended, socially-embedded argument deriving from a source text and continuing across generations via normal sociological channels (schools, friendships, political institutions, etc.). \
\
One might question whether \'93we\'94 (Anglo-American westerners) inhabit a \'93tradition\'94 at all. But MacIntyre points out that we do. It is variously titled: liberalism, modern liberalism, modernity, Enlightenment modernity. (Liberalism in this sense encompasses both contemporary \'93liberals\'94 and \'93conservatives\'94 in the popular sense.) For simplicity, I shall use the simple term \'91modernity\'92 or \'91Enlightenment modernity\'92 in most instances to describe this tradition. \
\
\
Modernity is a political movement. That is, modernity is a global human phenomenon, for it began with scientific, religious, and political shifts in Europe and caused cultural and intellectual shifts and furthered seismic shifts in science, religion, and politics. Even so, politics is perhaps the clearest marker of modernity; rise of the modern state is perhaps the greatest sign of modernity\'92s conquest of the western mind, heart, and imagination. As evidence of this suggestion, we can remember that almost all the luminaries of the Enlightenment wrote on politics: Mill\'92s ethical writings are almost always written with an eye to reformer civil law; Kant wrote books like *Perpetual Peace*; John Locke wrote about perception and understanding but also treatises on government. Hence, MacIntyre\'92s critique of modernity has political as well as social and ethical aspects. \
\
### Modernity is hopeless ###\
\
Throughout MacIntyre\'92s oeuvre, his abiding conviction is that something is terribly wrong with modernity and it needs restorative resources from outside itself. I would like to briefly present an outline of this critique. It will make more intelligible the virtue theory to come. \
\
From his early work on Marxism and historical ethics, to his middle period writing on virtue, moral epistemology, and tradition, to his latest writings on the university, one persistent theme has been a radical critique of the foundations of Enlightenment modernity.[@mcmylor2005alasdair] But rather than embracing a thorough, cynical, postmodern sort of nihilism, however, MacIntyre (perhaps surprisingly) discovered an older and still vital foundation among the ruins. It is upon this foundation of Aristotelian virtue, and eventually Thomism, that MacIntyre continues to build. \
\
MacIntyre compared modern moral discourse to catastrophe, where only fragments of intelligible moral discourse survive in states of increasing decay. He says: \
\
>\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Imagine that the natural sciences were to suffer the effects of a catastrophe. A series of environmental disasters are blamed by the general public on the scientists. Widespread riots occur, laboratories are burnt down, physicists are lynched, books and instruments are destroyed. Finally a Know-Nothing political movement takes power and successfully abolishes science teaching in schools and universities, imprisoning and executing the remaining scientists. Later still there is a reaction against this destructive movement and enlightened people seek to revive science, although they have largely forgotten what it was. But all that they possess are fragments: a knowledge of experiments detached from any knowledge of the theoretical context which gave them significance; parts of theories unrelated either to the other bits and pieces of theory which they possess or to experiment; instruments whose use has been forgotten; half-chapters from books, single pages from articles, not always fully legible because torn and charred. Nonetheless all these fragments are reembodied in a set of practices which go under the revived names of physics, chemistry and biology. Adults argue with each other about the respective merits of relativity theory, evolutionary theory and phlogiston theory, although they possess only a very partial knowledge of each. Children learn by heart the surviving portions of the periodic table and recite as incantations some of the theorems of Euclid. Nobody, or almost nobody, realizes that what they are doing is not natural science in any proper sense at all. For everything that they do and say conforms to certain canons of consistency and coherence and those contexts which would be needed to make sense of what they are doing have been lost, perhaps irretrievably.[@macintyre1984after 1]\
\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
The picture here captures the state of moral discourse. The moral problems moderns face they can only address using the scraps of a previous and whole moral tradition. Since modern researchers (philosophers, historians, sociologists, etc.) all use methods and even practice disciplines that post-date the catastrophe, they cannot recognize the futility of their own research in recovering the coherence that has been lost. \
\
But the catastrophe did not affect only academic disciplines. It affects human culture. We live, MacIntyre surmises, in an \'93emotive\'94 culture. We use each we do not assume nor strive for common moral standards. An obvious symptom of the decay of moral discourse and social unity is interminable ethical disagreement.[@macintyre1984after 6] Moral discourse is largely devoted to moral disagreement, and moral disagreement is largely soaked in despair of ever reaching agreement. It is \'93shrill\'94 disagreement because each side is attempting to win by rhetoric; and each side is attempting to win by rhetoric because each side believes that no dialectical or logical case can be made on behalf of their value theory. Oddly enough, however, neither side wants to give up the appearance of having a dialectical case for their value theory. Moral discourse with its interminable moral disagreement retains the rhetorical *trappings* of rationality and objectivity while denying rationality and objectivity.\
\
Culturally and politically, moral discourse is a mess. In academia, things are no better. Professional ethicists disagree with each other on any normative point you can think of (the permissibility of abortion, the standards of justice in war, the limits of medical regulation), but they also disagree on normative frameworks (deontology, utilitarianism, divine command theory, contractarianism), and on metaethical points (moral realism, moral epistemology, moral semantics), and more. Both parties are passionate, informed, intelligent, open-minded and yet cannot come to anything like agreeing on the formal and material propositions under dispute. The apparent impossibility of settling moral disagreements over weighty primary normative issues, like abortion, sexual ethics, torture, war, the proper uses of technology has become the defining datum of modern reflection on morality and ethics. \
\
Rather than despair, MacIntyre noticed that similar disagreement has marked discussions in the natural sciences. This observation proved extremely fruitful. \
\
Briefly, Thomas Kuhn\'92s watershed *Structure of Scientific Revolutions* challenges the widespread naive belief that consensus in natural scientific inquires has been growing, steadily, in a straight line, since the 1600s. Rather, Kuhn persuasively argues, specific paradigms by which practitioners conduct research and through which they interpret evidence come and go. Some are fruitful, and are employed for generations. The paradigm is a research program around which many can unite as well as a stable scientific system of doctrine that can be added to or pruned. But lingering worries about the fine points of a scientific system and research program beget doubts about that system as a whole. At certain periods of epistemological crisis, researchers from rival programs (once dismissed) burst into the limelight by solving a problem the previous paradigm did not have the conceptual resources to solve. A paradigm shifts, a revolution has occurred. The new paradigm, once revolutionary, becomes the stable scientific system of a new era. From the perspective of one paradigm, it is difficult or impossible to judge the rational credentials of a rival paradigm.\
\
MacIntyre began to speculate about the possibility that Kuhn and Feyerabend\'92s analyses of scientific progress and scientific crisis could be fruitfully applied to ethics. His 1977 essay on epistemological crises was his own version of Kuhn's *Structure of Scientific Revolutions* -- we might call it MacIntyre's "Structure of Ethical Revolutions".[@macintyre1977epistemological] But Kuhn and Feyerabend ended in a radical pluralism about rationality and methodology, a scientific relativism unpalatable to many scientific realists. MacIntyre ended in a thoroughgoing, optimistic, progressive, anti-relativistic Thomism. \
\
This parallel explains several features of MacIntyre\'92s ethical philosophy. MacIntyre\'92s ethical theory is both extremely cognizant of historical background and extremely cognizant of methodology; some have thought his ethics (of the good) collapses into epistemology (a means of rationally identifying the good). The thought is a mistake, but an understandable one. An understandable mistake that also happens in the philosophy of science. \
\
This comparison between ethical *crises* and scientific crises makes clear why the epistemology of morality features so prominently in MacIntyre's later works. He is not only trying to give an account of the good but trying to give an account of the rational faculties and rational resources by which communities and individuals discover the good. }