{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Most philosophers believe that at least some of our ethical beliefs are really true and that some things are really good. But if the good is real, is it natural or nonnatural? Richard Boyd argues that our term \'91goodness\'92 refers to a set of natural \'93immanent\'94 mutually reinforcing properties that favor human well-being. Robert Adams argues that the good is identical to a supernatural, transcendent God. Good things are such just insofar as they resemble God. Which metaethical position makes the best sense of our (sometimes correct, sometimes incorrect) application of ethical terms in everyday discourse and the historic discipline of systematic ethics? \
\
	These questions embroil us in metaphysical, epistemological, ethical, and semantic considerations. Of course, a full treatment of them here is not possible. As Boyd points out, metaphysical commitments to or against the existence of a god will sway one\'92s ethical commitments. Rather, in this paper, I examine a few facets of the larger dialectic, focusing on written conversation between Boyd and Adams spanning one book and three articles. I offer my own contribution to their conversation. My conclusion is that \'97 even absent independent arguments from philosophy of religion\'97 our most stable and cogent ethical thinking, and our most incorrigible ethical principles, sit better in a framework where the good is understood to be transcendent, and unitary. Adams has the upper hand, I think, for three reasons: (1) Adams\'92 account most accurately explains the intuitive truth that we ought to be open to revising many ethical beliefs but that there are some that we (already) know certainly enough that we ought not be open to revising them. (2) Boyd\'92s homeostatic property cluster idea, though impressive and thorough, is not yet ambitious enough to even aspire to explain the numerous (and apparently irreducible) various kinds of goodness (and beauty, and excellence, etc.) but restricts itself to human welfare, which is only part of an adequate metathics. And (3) epistemic norms are more closely related to ethical norms than Boyd would like to admit.}