{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 # Alasdair MacIntyre: Virtue in Practice \
\
### Introduction ###\
\
Alasdair MacIntyre (born 1929) is an influential moral and political philosopher. His eighteen books and greater than three hundred published articles have indelibly impacted analytic ethics and several other fields. MacIntyre embodies the ideal Roy Sellars commended, that philosophers \'93should be well-grounded both in the history of philosophy and in the sciences, and that the philosopher should engage philosophically with the major moral, social, and political issues of the day.\'94[@mcdonoughroy] Refusing to restrict himself to a single topic, MacIntyre has contributed to virtue ethics, communitarianism, the history of philosophy, political science, epistemology, the philosophy of education; but he has contributed to other fields outside philosophy strictly defined, including sociology and literary analysis. Refusing to restrict himself to a strict style, his work often draws on sociology, psychology, and literature for its themes and illustrations, such as the memorable picture he paints of emotivism as not merely a theory of moral language but a \'93culture\'94 with its own paradigmatic \'93characters\'94, the Manager and the Therapist.[@macintyre1984after chapter 3] His long career has been characterized by a long evolution within and across various schools of thought. For example, he has adjusted (and in some cases, retracted) his affiliations. He began his career as a Marxist, before \'93converting\'94 to Aristotelianism, and most recently \'93converting\'94 to Christianity and Thomism. He denies the labels \'93virtue ethicist\'94 and \'93communitarian,\'94 despite his contributions to both fields, rather preferring to be thought of simply as a \'91philosopher\'92 and a Thomist. But he is still writing and still thinking. Those who familiar with the expansiveness of his research will not be too quick to declare that his evolution is finished.\
\
In spite of (or perhaps because of) this multifaceted oeuvre, MacIntyre has had enormous and interdisciplinary influence. Weinstein observes that Macintyre did for ethics what Rawls did for political philosophy. Rawls re-invigorated political philosophy, \'93inaugurating the dominance of late twentieth-century liberalism. Hundreds, if not thousands of articles have responded to Rawls\'92 work, and the rest of the century saw a flood of books on every nuance of liberal theory.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 38] MacIntyre re-invigorated ethical philosophy by attending to its history.[@weinstein2003macintyre chapter 4.] \
\
### Two main themes: history and practical reason\
\
The full significance of his legacy remains to be seen, but two of his most oft-recurring thematic points have had widespread impact: the first is that ethical terms, concepts, and judgments have *a history*. We can only responsibly use or evaluate our own moral and more broadly evaluative terms, concepts, and judgments when we have some historical perspective on them. We must know ourselves as members of a \'93tradition\'94, that is, a historically-extended social community with its own conceptual resources. The second is that moral reasoning is a species of practical reasoning *tout court*. We can only build a clear, coherent, and comprehensive theory of the good if simultaneous we are building a theory of rationality itself. Together, these two themes have guided MacIntyre\'92s conclusions. \
\
His commitments to thinking through ethical concepts in tandem with concepts of rationality, and thinking through both in historical/traditional perspective lead him to many specific conclusions. The three that shall concern us here are these: first, that \'93we\'94 (MacIntyre\'92s western, English-speaking or European audience) are members of the tradition of liberalism, modernity, the Enlightenment.  \
\
His second conclusion is that, compared to the moral, social, and political unity of previous generations, modern moral philosophy since the Enlightenment has gotten off track. The last several hundred years of philosophical ethics in the west are best explained by positing a moral, social, and political disaster. Morality has become unintelligible. If morality is a set of rules, actions, or character traits that are admirable or praiseworthy, then intelligible morality cannot but exist within a nexus of two other concepts: human-nature-as-it-is (identified with help from psychology, sociology, etc.) *and* a conception of \'93human-nature-as-it-could-be-if-achieved-its-telos\'94. Our modern, liberal, Enlightenment tradition (which we shall explicate below) got off track due to the attempt to banish *telos* or intrinsic purposes from morality, rendering the virtues, moral duties, praiseworthy actions unintelligible. \
\
A third conclusions that will concern us in this chapter follows from the first two. The restoration of historical perspective and of thinking of ethical reasoning as a species of practical reasoning showed him that the restoration of telos, of a conception of human nature as it could be, a clear conception of the potential of human nature, would lead to a restoration of moral intelligibility and would thus promise to undergird a restoration of social and political integrity. He invites his readers, especially those who find the modern liberal Enlightenment tradition fatally flawed, to give up on its hopeless elements and restore it with the resources of the older, Aristotelian tradition of virtue. The promise of such a restoration and recovery is immense. If the point of education, politics, and social life were once again the acquisition and exercise of virtues, these activities and pursuits would become intelligible in ways that many modern folk can hardly imagine. \
\
These conclusions are, of course, tersely put. Our job in this chapter is to unpack them. And these conclusions are subject to various important objections. Our job is to articulate (some of) them and respond to them.\
\
But it is worth noting at the outset that these conclusions are as radical as they are popular. MacIntyre\'92s ideal audience is "small farmers, fishermen (and women), schoolteachers who refuse to become bureaucratic functionaries, those who retain ideals of craftsmanship in manual or mental labor and members of cooperatives aimed at remedying hunger or homelessness."[@weinstein2003macintyre 8.] In other words, he writes to academics and to regular folks; to individuals and to communities. And, to the surprise of some, his influence has been marked. \
Those who accept his invitation tend to be more dissatisfied with the present modern culture, modern morality, and modern politics. Such may find his solutions compelling. However, MacIntyre never writes in such a way as to seem to *compel* (neither by reason nor rhetoric) anyone to believe his theory. \
\
The invitation to recover the virtues of the tradition of Aristotle (and Aquinas and others) really is an *invitation* \'97 it is not a *demand.*  He does not *force* anyone to play by his rules, to accept his definitions of terms. Many have declined his invitation to restore the Aristotelian tradition of virtue. Those who decline tend to be more or less content with modern ethical and political thinking as it is. The changes they want to make are corrections and improvements, sometimes extensive changes, but nothing approaching an overhaul. Therefore, they tend to find  MacIntyre's criticisms excessively polemical and his solutions needlessly radical. He invites readers who are not discontent with modernity to self-reflect and to reflect on our common history. They may find something of interest in his criticisms. But even if there is nothing of interest in his criticisms and solutions, they are invited to consider his solutions in a spirit of philosophical imagination. "*If* modern morality were a disaster... would something like this be a good solution?"\
\
### Chapter outline\
\
This chapter is divided into four sections. \
\
**Section 1: Tradition and history**. Section 1 sets the foundation for MacIntyre\'92s theory of virtue and practical wisdom that he offers as a cure for what ills modern moral philosophy. First, I shall explain MacIntyre\'92s assumption that we moderns \'97 even putatively \'93anti-traditionalist\'94 moderns \'97 are part of a \'93tradition,\'94 and explicate his belief that our modern tradition is fatally flawed. I will tell part of MacIntyre\'92s personal history, his epistemological crises, that helps make sense of his eventual theories.\
\
**Section 2: Virtue**.  Section 2 summarizes and discusses MacIntyre\'92s theory of virtue as presented in his four main virtue books. I shall present his positive account of virtue in historical perspective. I shall also summarize the related supporting concepts that uphold this account of virtue: practices, the self and its narrative of human life, practical reason and human nature, *telos* and happiness, tradition and practical rationality. \
\
**Section 3: Objections**. Section 3 presents a sampling of the powerful objections critics have offered to various aspects of MacIntyre\'92s theory.  Also, I shall try to identify the main types of critic \'97 crudely put, they are modernists, postmodernists, and MacIntyre\'92s own fellow Thomists. While it would be impossible to mention let alone do justice to the many excellent responses from MacIntyre\'92s sizable crowd of allies and enemies, I shall  focus on what three of what I take to be three superlatively important challenges to MacIntyre\'92s key concepts of virtue, tradition-constituted-rationality, and teleology. The first objection pertains to the relativism; many worry that MacIntyre has undercut any possibility of intelligibly defending the robust moral realism inherent to the Aristotelian tradition of virtue. The second objection pertains to rationality and tradition (which are inextricably related in MacIntyre\'92s work, as we shall see); some worry that his theory of rationality is plainly incoherent, while others worry that it is coherent but that MacIntyre\'92s espousing of it *while* arguing his particular ethical conclusions amounts to a performative contradiction. The third objection pertains to teleology and the concept of telos; some worry that trying to shoehorn teleology back into ethics, even if it were desirable to do so, will require accepting tenets from a discredited Aristotelian metaphysics of nature; others argue that ethics can get along well enough without any need for telos. \
\
**Section 4: Discussion**. Section 4 discusses these objections and considers whether  MacIntyre\'92s virtue theory contains the resources with which to answer them satisfactorily.  While I cannot claim to finally calm the worries of his critics, I argue that each of these three objections can be answered. His notion of tradition-constituted-rationality, while frustratingly open to interpretation (by philosophers from varying traditions!) is ultimately a powerful and useful framework with which to explain the paradoxical phenomena of widespread moral disagreement *alongside* widespread moral agreement. His notion of virtue is not, at the end of the day, relativistic if by that term we mean to say that no one person\'92s or culture\'92s conception of virtue is rationally superior to any other\'92s. And the needed type of teleology for MacIntyre\'92s proposed restoration of the Aristotelian tradition of virtue is credible within our context of modern science, so long as we carefully distinguish various possible types of \'91teleology\'92 (e.g., there are at least cosmic, metaphysical, biological, and social teleologies). With all that said, I shall argue that we should expect any \'93answer\'94 to such fundamental worries to expose deep metaphilosophical fault lines. So, I shall caution MacIntyre\'92s allies and enemies to be cautious about hastily labeling each other as \'93unphilosophical\'94 on the basis of an inability \'97 at the moment \'97 of finally adjudicating these disputes. I shall close this chapter with a reflection on why some find MacIntyre\'92s philosophical ethics so infuriating and easy to misunderstand. The same features of his theory that infuriate some magnetically fascinate others and so reflection on them may, I believe, illuminate MacIntyre\'92s distinctive legacy. \
\
## Tradition and history ##\
\
My first goal in this chapter is to make an adequate presentation MacIntyre's account of virtue. However, it would be unwise quickly to dive in to that presentation without two preliminaries. To see why, consider two of his early (and by no means final) formulations of a definition of virtue: First, he defines virtues as \'93acquired human qualities that enable their possessor to achieve those goods which are internal to practices.\'94[@macintyre1984after 191] And secondly:\
\
>The virtues find their point and purpose not only in sustaining those relationships necessary if the variety of goods internal to practices are to be achieved and not only in sustaining the form of an individual life in which that individual may seek out his or her good as the good of his or her whole life, but also in sustaining those traditions which provide both practices and individual lives with their necessary historical context.[@macintyre1984after 223]\
\
These formulations define virtue in terms of "practices" that an individual engages in throughout his or her "whole life", all in context of a "tradition". These three concepts -- practice, life, and tradition -- are constitutive pieces of MacIntyre's account of virtue. While discussions of *practice* and *life* can wait, I should be cutting off the Hydra\'92s immortal head if I were to explain *tradition* at the outset. Thankfully, a brief preliminary explanation will suffice for now. More details will emerge as they are needed.\
\
### We inhabit a tradition ###\
\
MacIntyre maintains that every inquirer inhabits a tradition. What does this mean? First we must take the point in its least controversial and hence most trivial sense that each inquirer is an embodied human being, living in a particular time and place, speaking (and perhaps thinking) within a given language, inquiring within a particular social setting. These trivia are not very interesting yet. But they are only the beginning.  \
\
What is a tradition? "A living tradition . . . is an historically extended, socially embodied argument\'85"[@macintyre1984after 222. He specifies that the content of the tradition is self-reflexive: "\'85  an argument precisely in part about the goods which constitute that tradition."] deriving from a source text and continuing across generations via normal sociological channels (schools, friendships, political institutions, etc.). So, for example, by MacIntyre's lights Judaism is a tradition rooted in a source text (the Tanakh) and continuing across generations through arguments carried out in synagogues, universities, and so on about how to best interpret and apply the Tanakh and later commentaries. Augustinianism is a tradition rooted in the Holy Bible and Augustine's corpus, consisting in socially-embedded arguments over how to best interpret and apply Augustine; history-writing is a tradition, rooted in source texts such as Herodotus, and Thucydides, Gibbon and extending through Europe and the western world, consisting of a series of historical and historiographical arguments over not just "what happened" but how to define history, how to conduct historical enquiry. \
\
With all this said, MacIntyre assumes that "we" inhabit a tradition. Some readers may object: Do \'93we\'94 (Anglo-Americans in particular or westerners in general) inhabit a \'93tradition\'94 at all? MacIntyre argues that we do. What tradition is it supposed to be? It is variously titled: liberalism, modern liberalism, modernity, Enlightenment modernity. (Liberalism does not correlate to the contemporary political division between \'93conservatives\'94 and \'93liberals.\'94 Rather, liberalism in this sense encompasses both contemporary \'93liberals\'94 and \'93conservatives\'94.) For simplicity, in most instances I shall use the simple term \'91modernity\'92 or \'91Enlightenment modernity\'92 to describe this tradition. \
\
In the (1990) Gifford Lectures, MacIntyre presented three rival versions of moral inquiry as expressions of three rival traditions.[@macintyre1990three] A book was later made of these lectures. Richard Forty wrote that the book \'93deepens and defends MacIntyre\'92s claim that genuinely rational enquiry requires membership in a particular type of moral community. He offers the most persuasive recent restatement of the Thomist position on the relation of metaphysics to morality.\'94 What are the \'93three rival versions\'94? He labels them \'91genealogy,\'92 \'91encyclopedia\'92, and \'91tradition\'92. Now, the use of the single word \'91tradition\'92 to mean both the genus (with three species) *and* one of those three species is deadly confusing, so I propose to call the third tradition Thomism. \
\
The three are defined by their respective attitudes toward the past. Genealogists use the past to subvert and \'93debunk\'94 the present. Encyclopedists use the present to denigrate and \'93debunk\'94 the past. Thomists use the past as a basis for building upon and yet transcending the past. Genealogists think, in advance, that no one in the future can use the present as a foundation. Encyclopedists think, in advance, that no one in the future will ever be able to transcend the present; they think \'93we have arrived.\'94 Thomists think, in advance, that those in the future will use the present as a foundation for building upon and yet transcending the present. The genealogist par excellence is Frederich Nietzsche, though Foucault and Derrida get honorable mention. The encyclopedist par excellence is the ninth edition of the *Encyclopedia Brittanica* and to Adam Lord Gifford (1820\'961887) himself. Gifford was a senator of the College of Justice in Scotland and inaugurated these prestigious lectures to represent the \'93state of the art\'94 of all knowledge. As for the *Britannica*, one reviewer put the point this way: \'93The *Britannica* represents the idea of an impersonal, universal, tradition-free conception of rational enquiry into morals, telling a story of the progress of reason in philosophy an the sciences through an appeal to timeless, universal principles of rationality. The encyclopedic tradition holds moral enquiry to be about an autonomous, distinct realm of human life, which can and must be understood solely in its own terms." For reasons we shall discuss, MacIntyre thinks this version of rational enquiry is doomed. Nevertheless "it still exercises an extraordinary influence on contemporary thought and on university curricula."[@pinkard1991three] \
\
Now, modernity is an encyclopedic tradition. I was educated in a modern university on modern fare, as were my readers (I presume). So, by MacIntyre\'92s lights, we are \'93encyclopedists.\'94 Our source texts are Hume, Kant, Newton, Locke, and others. Ours is a tradition extended through time and socially embedded in the U.S., Canada, England and parts of Ireland and Scotland. The encyclopedic tradition is not narrow; it is indeed *encyclopedic*. It has political, scientific, religious, and philosophical aspects. The intellectual tradition of modernity arises alongside the rise of the modern state. We do well to remember that almost all the luminaries of the Enlightenment philosophy also wrote on politics: Mill\'92s ethical writings are almost always written with an eye to reformer civil law; Kant wrote books like *Perpetual Peace*; John Locke wrote about perception and understanding but also treatises on government. Within modernity, we analytic philosophers have further source texts in Russell, Frege, and Wittgenstein, instigating arguments over how to best conduct philosophical enquiry, the definition of analytic philosophy, and the relationship between language and thought. These arguments take place almost exclusively in a university setting, through academic books, conferences, lectures, seminars, and journal publications rather than (as in other times) through newspapers, popular books, parliamentary debates, and so on. \
\
The difference between 'tradition' and neighbor concepts, such as culture, theory, institution, inquiry, and practice will, I hope, become clearer below. And a few objections to MacIntyre's allegedly vague definition will be discussed below. The reader is not yet expected to agree with such a characterization of tradition. It is sufficient, at this juncture, to grasp the point and to grant it as an axiom for what follows. \
\
### MacIntyre's intellectual history ###\
\
MacIntyre's lifework has been an invitation to recover the tradition of virtues. But virtues are not free-floating moral concepts; they are embedded in a living moral tradition, the Aristotelian tradition. Before I presented his account of virtue, I needed to supply at least a makeshift account of tradition. There is one other account I need to give. Even with a notion of ourselves as embodied members of a living tradition of Enlightenment modernity in hand, it would be an injustice to MacIntyre's way of presenting his theory as the fruit of his own philosophical enquiry if I did not briefly tell the story of that enquiry. \
\
MacIntyre's intellectual history is a story of several intellectual crises. Each crisis compelled him to draw on the resources of history and of contemporary philosophy and science to discover not just a more adequate answer to the particular intellectual problem but to reflect on methodology. \
\
He grew up in a "border" culture between rustic Scottish fishing villages and the elite intellectual life offered him at the independent Epsom College and by his tutor R. G. Collinwood. During his undergraduate study of the classics at Queen Mary College of the University of London, he acquired an interest in ethics. He pursued an M.A. At the University of Manchester and wrote his thesis ("*The Significance of Moral Judgments*") critiquing the emotivism of C. L. Stevenson. \
\
From his early work on Marxism and historical ethics, to his middle period writing on virtue, moral epistemology, and tradition, to his latest writings on the university, one persistent theme has been a radical critique of the foundations of Enlightenment modernity.[@mcmylor2005alasdair] Many who critique the rationalism and foundationalism of modernity end up with "the masters of suspicion" who distrust thought, language, and rationality itself. MacIntyre took a surprising course. The kinds of critical analysis the "masters of suspicion" use did level to the ground much of the edifice of modernity. But rather than embracing a thorough, cynical, postmodernism of this sort, MacIntyre took to an older and still vital foundation among the ruins. It is upon this foundation of Aristotelian virtue, and eventually Thomism, that MacIntyre continues to build. \
\
One of MacIntyre's most memorable and oft-cited images compares modern moral discourse to the hypothetical state of scientific discourse in a post-apocalyptic catastrophe. Only decaying fragments of intelligible moral discourse survive. He invitation is this: \
\
>Imagine that the natural sciences were to suffer the effects of a catastrophe. A series of environmental disasters are blamed by the general public on the scientists. Widespread riots occur, laboratories are burnt down, physicists are lynched, books and instruments are destroyed. Finally a Know-Nothing political movement takes power and successfully abolishes science teaching in schools and universities, imprisoning and executing the remaining scientists. Later still there is a reaction against this destructive movement and enlightened people seek to revive science, although they have largely forgotten what it was. But all that they possess are fragments: a knowledge of experiments detached from any knowledge of the theoretical context which gave them significance; parts of theories unrelated either to the other bits and pieces of theory which they possess or to experiment; instruments whose use has been forgotten; half-chapters from books, single pages from articles, not always fully legible because torn and charred. Nonetheless all these fragments are reembodied in a set of practices which go under the revived names of physics, chemistry and biology. Adults argue with each other about the respective merits of relativity theory, evolutionary theory and phlogiston theory, although they possess only a very partial knowledge of each. Children learn by heart the surviving portions of the periodic table and recite as incantations some of the theorems of Euclid. Nobody, or almost nobody, realizes that what they are doing is not natural science in any proper sense at all. For everything that they do and say conforms to certain canons of consistency and coherence and those contexts which would be needed to make sense of what they are doing have been lost, perhaps irretrievably.[@macintyre1984after 1]\
\
The picture here captures the state of moral discourse. The moral problems moderns face they can only address using the scraps of a previous and whole moral tradition. Since modern researchers (philosophers, historians, sociologists, etc.) all use methods and even practice disciplines that post-date the catastrophe, they cannot recognize the futility of their own research in recovering the coherence that has been lost. \
\
Now, MacIntyre's image is not merely about morality as one sub-field within academic philosophy. It is about morality as part of the fabric of social and political life, part of what binds groups together, gives urgency and meaning to their joint projects, sustains consensus about civil laws by which honors and goods are distributed and criminal punishments are delivered. We live, MacIntyre surmises, in an \'93emotive\'94 culture. We use each we do not assume nor strive for common moral standards. An obvious symptom of the decay of moral discourse and social unity is interminable ethical disagreement.[@macintyre1984after 6] Moral discourse is largely devoted to moral disagreement, and moral disagreement is largely soaked in despair of ever reaching agreement. It is \'93shrill\'94 disagreement because each side is attempting to win by rhetoric; and each side is attempting to win by rhetoric because each side believes that no dialectical or logical case can be made on behalf of their value theory. Oddly enough, however, neither side wants to give up the *appearance* of having a dialectical case for its value theory. Moral discourse with its interminable moral disagreement retains the rhetorical *trappings* of rationality and objectivity while denying rationality and objectivity.\
\
Culturally and politically, moral discourse is a mess. In academia, things are no better. Professional ethicists disagree with each other on any applied ethical issue you can think of such as the permissibility of abortion, the standards of justice in war, the limits of medical regulation and so on. They also disagree about the background issue in resolving practical moral problems -- that is, which normative framework to use, deontology, utilitarianism, divine command theory, contractarianism, quietism, ironic nihilism or something else entirely. Modern ethicists have sometimes taken comfort in the retreat to meta-ethics. Perhaps stepping back from sticky normative questions will permit the calm, cool, and rational resolution of some problems in moral semantics, moral metaphysics, and moral epistemology. Yet after a century of metaethics, the field has not consolidated but proliferated moral disagreements. Both parties are passionate, informed, intelligent, open-minded and yet cannot come to anything like agreement on the formal and material propositions under dispute. It seems that deep and abiding disagreement within normative ethics and metaethics is the defining datum of modern moral philosophy. This is the "catastrophe" MacIntyre pictures above.\
\
Rather than despair, MacIntyre observed an analogy between morality and science that proved extremely fruitful. He was deeply moved by Thomas Kuhn's influential work on the structure of revolution between various paradigms in the natural sciences. What if a similar structure obtained in revolution between paradigms or traditions in the "moral sciences"? Anyone familiar with Kuhn's watershed *Structure of Scientific Revolutions* has felt the significance of his provocative argument. Briefly, as I read it, Kuhn's work directly confronts the widespread and naive belief that consensus in natural scientific inquiry has been growing in slow and steady straight line since the 1600s. Rather, Kuhn persuasively argues, specific paradigms by which practitioners conduct research and through which they interpret evidence come and go. Some are fruitful, and are employed for generations. But some stagnate. A paradigm is a research program that unites many researchers with a methodology and unites their conclusions within a stable scientific system of doctrine. The encyclopedia of knowledge can be augmented or pruned, but its taxonomy stays mostly the same. A paradigm comes in for trouble when lingering worries about the fine points of a scientific system and research program beget doubts about that system as a whole. If not resolved, these worries bloom into a full-blown epistemological crisis. At certain periods of epistemological crisis, researchers from rival programs (once dismissed) burst into the limelight by solving a problem the previous paradigm did not have the conceptual resources to solve. A paradigm shifts, a revolution has occurred. The new paradigm becomes entrenched in the establishment. Once young, rebellious, and revolutionary, it becomes middle-aged, stable, and respectable. It is the scientific paradigm of a new era. From the perspective of one paradigm, it is difficult or impossible to judge the rational credentials of a rival paradigm. \
\
Now, Kuhn concluded his study in a radical pluralism about rationality and methodology. This smacks of a scientific relativism unpalatable to many scientific realists. Paul Feyerabend cheerfully embraced this possibility. He argued for "epistemological anarchism," where *any* method will do as long as it is "fruitful." He thought that "rationality" and "science" were merely bully terms with sociological power to club dissenters from the dominant paradigm into submission. MacIntyre took a different tack.\
\
MacIntyre began to speculate about the possibility that Kuhn and Feyerabend\'92s analyses of scientific progress and scientific crisis could be fruitfully applied to ethics. His 1977 essay on epistemological crises was his own version of Kuhn's *Structure of Scientific Revolutions* -- we might call this essay MacIntyre's "Structure of Ethical Revolutions".[@macintyre1977epistemological] The parallel between the two explains several features of MacIntyre\'92s ethical philosophy. MacIntyre\'92s ethical theory is both extremely cognizant of historical background and extremely cognizant of methodology; some have thought his ethics (of the good) collapses into epistemology (a means of rationally identifying the good). The thought is a mistake, but an understandable one. An understandable mistake that also happens in the philosophy of science. \
\
This comparison between *ethical* crises and *scientific* crises makes clear why the epistemology of morality features so prominently in MacIntyre's later works. He is not only trying to give an account of the good but trying to give an account of the rational faculties and rational resources by which communities and individuals discover the good. \
\
MacIntyre's ethical philosophy began in crisis and despair, but did not end there. It ended, rather, in a thoroughgoing Thomism that is at once historicist and progressive, at once optimistic and anti-relativistic. Making sense of such a conclusion is not easy. But it is much easier if we are clear about where his radical critic of the modern tradition arises from, and how he aims to solve it. \
\
## Virtue, Practice, Tradition\
\
I can now present MacIntyre's account of virtue.  His virtue theory is not fully supplemented until he completes the\'93*After Virtue* Project\'94 consisting of *After Virtue* (1984), *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* (1988); *Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry* (1990); and *Dependent Rational Animals* (1999). But the most focused presentation is *After Virtue*. We will begin there. \
\
In this section, I will reflect in detail on his initial definition, which he derives from a careful study of the traditions of virtue from Homer, Plato, Aristotle, the Greek tragic poets, the New Testament, Aquinas, Jane Austen, and Benjamin Franklin. Then I will summarize how he expands this definition with supporting concepts such as the self (which is the bearer of individual virtue), practice (which is an activity in which virtues are needed), practical reason (which is our human nature). \
\
Each of these interlocking concepts build on and also support his conception of virtue. If these concepts as presented are accurate to the phenomena of human life, then each one lends support to MacIntyre\'92s conviction that \'93humans need the virtues.\'94 \
\
### Virtue \'97 a first pass\
\
MacIntyre\'92s philosophical methodology is exemplified in how he defines \'91virtue\'92 within *After Virtue*. He begins with Homeric virtues (roughly, the performance of one\'92s social role) and concludes with his own His account is historical but not historicist; it aims for universality but is not purely abstract conceptual analysis. It is, in a word, traditional. MacIntyre\'92s definition emerges from history but is not restricted to its history; he does not vow to conserve. Yet it does not appear \'93out of heaven\'94, unprecedented, unpredicted, unaccountable, and ready-made. \
His first definition, as mentioned above, is that virtues are \'93acquired human qualities that enable their possessor to achieve those goods which are internal to practices."[@macintyre1984after 191] A few initial comments are in order about each phrase of this definition. \
\
First, virtues are acquired *human* qualities, presumably opposed to analogous qualities of lower animals.  Formal or functional qualities that enable an animal to survive and thrive (i.e., the flexible flagellum of the bacterium, the swiftness of a deer) are excluded from the class of virtues by definition. Now, MacIntyre later changes his mind on this point. *Dependent Rational Animals* will challenge *After Virtue*\'92s presumed opposition between human and non-human animals. \
\
Secondly, virtues are *acquired* human qualities. In the first line of Plato's *Meno*, Meno asks Socrates a question that moral philosophers have continued to try to answer for the last 2,400 years. He asks "whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice; or if neither by teaching nor practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"[@plato, *Meno* 70a] MacIntyre's answer is not that virtue is a gift of the gods, but that it is *acquired.* This is important because, as a recent volume edited by Mark Alfano[@alfano2015current] discusses, one important question for virtue ethicists is the range of what positive traits count as virtues. MacIntyre, it would seem, limits the range to exclude inborn or genetically determined qualities like a good memory or excellent eyesight from being considered virtues. In this, he agrees with Aristotle that virtue is *in accordance with* nature but not *by nature*. That is, we might say, virtues do not arise "automatically" but also are not acquired by working against the grain of our human nature. Rather, they can be seen as a "normal" psychological outgrowth of cultivating certain human practices. \
\
Thirdly, virtues enable their possessor to achieve particular *goods.* There are two implicit points here. Virtues by definition are beneficial. A virtuous trait *cannot* be directed at achieving ills. This point solves by definitional fiat a very vexing question that recurs often in ethical philosophy, namely, can overall vicious and wicked people have particular virtues? Can the thief be courageous, the dictator magnanimous, the glutton affable? It certainly seems that the answer is yes. I shall discuss this point a bit more under the objection of relativism. \
\
A second implicit point is that virtues here seem to be defined instrumentally.  A misunderstanding lurks in the vicinity. Virtues *are* instrumental for MacIntyre, but they are not *merely* instrumental. They are both instrumental (to the achievement of certain goods) and also *partly constitutive of those goods.* Virtues are both means to an end and also ends in themselves. Phronesis or practical wisdom, for example, enables agents to make good decisions that result in greater happiness and thriving as a human being. But also having phronesis *just is part of the definition* of being a thriving human being. Now, this refusal to treat the means/end distinction as clean and absolute is liable to cause his critics to misunderstand his position. As Charles Taylor points out:\
\
>It is a feature of many modern theories... that they cannot abide this kind of relation, in which one element is both cause and constituent of another. It is a central demand of one influential construal of modern reason that one clearly sort out means from ends. For utilitarians, the good is happiness, and virtues can only be good instrumentally... If the basic point of morality is to do the right actions, then the virtues must be seen as purely executive. They cannot also be seen as part of the end, because the end is not defined that way.[@taylor 25] \
\
This worry exposes deep fault lines. For the sake of completing my presentation of virtue, I must set it aside for now. I shall return to it under the heading of the objection about teleology.  \
\
Fourthly, MacIntyre defines virtues with reference goods internal to *practices*. Practice is a key term of art within MacIntyre's theory of virtue. To misunderstand 'practice' would be to misunderstand MacIntyre. So with these initial comments in hand, I shall more deeply explore MacIntyre's unfolding account of virtue in the following sub-sections. Each section will elaborate on one of the following key components: practice, self, and tradition. \
\
### Practice ###\
\
What is a practice? A practice is a social activity aimed at defined ends. Each practice has a history, a set of practitioners, a common set of standards, and a common goal. MacIntyre mentions chess, farming, and political activity as examples *inter alia*. A practice is not merely a reflexive action (like scratching an itch) nor merely a single, discrete, intelligible action (like pulling a weed); it is an intelligible set of actions such as tilling, sowing, watering, protecting, harvesting, storing, etc., all embedded within a social context and organized around a particular goal. Farming is a social activity undertaken (let's say) for the sake of producing sufficient quantities of edible food for the farmer, the farmer's family, and the general marketplace. (This example is not intended to be controversial \'97 please overlook any factual mistakes on the details.) Farming as a practice has a history or series of cultural histories, a set of farmers who belong to it or practice it, and a common set of standards that define good and bad farming.  \
\
Leading MacIntyre scholar, Christopher Lutz, analyzes MacIntyre\'92s famous passage into the following four statements. A practice is: \
\
>[1] a complex social activity that [2] enables participants to gain goods internal to the practice. [3] Participants achieve excellence in practices by gaining the internal goods. When participants achieve excellence, [3] the social understandings of excellence in the practice, of the goods of the practice, and of the possibility of achieving excellence in the practice are systematically extended.[@lutz2015] \
\
As this explication makes more clear, MacIntyre\'92s notion of virtue and practice is tied to the goods \'93internal to\'94 practices. He later calls internal goods "goods of excellence" and calls external ones "goods of effectiveness.\'94 The point here is, I think, clear. The goods internal to farming are just those that *necessarily constitute success within a given practice as it is*: the production of good food, edible food, nutritious food, etc. (Of course, not all farmers aim to produce comestibles, but I am generalizing.) Virtues relative to the practice of farming might include strength, dexterity with equipment, sensitivity to service animals, etc. Without these, the goods internal to farming are unachievable. \
\
Goods "external" to farming are those that might result from the practice but are not necessary parts: fame, fortune, good friends, physical fitness. Mere efficiency in attaining such external goods does not entail the presence of a virtue. In fact, the desire to pursue external goods in the course of engaging in a practice is not just a neutral desire \'97 it is a *temptation.* Virtues are needed to overcome those temptations and to succeed at political activity, judging \'93success\'94 only by the standards defined within practice itself. \
\
An illustrative example is political activity. Political activity can be undertaken by agents motivated to achieve goods internal or external to the practice. That is, some people engage in political activity *in order to bring about* the health, securing, and flourishing of the *polis*. But others (we need not speculate the proportion!) engage in order to achieve \'93external\'94, unessential, goods such as satisfying their own ambition, achieving fame and power. Very often we see American politicians running for office with apparently only one aim: book sales. \
\
As I see it, virtue defined by practice can already be significantly contrasted against mere *happiness* or *pleasure* as found in Mill, and against mere *duty* or *good will* as found in Kant. On the one hand, the standards by which farmers judge each other are not static and universal formal laws. They are \'93contentful,\'94 immanent, flexible standards. On the other hand, the standards by which practitioners judge each other are not all \'93external\'94 ; they are not merely an arbitrary set of social conventions. Farmers cannot get together and decide farming is no longer about husbandry but is about selling land along highways for billboard advertisements. The practice itself, with its history and its aims, has a structure that is persists across generations and flexes, but does not break, with varying standards. That structure is passed along, modified, but modified according to an inner logic. Many have agreed with Elizabeth Anscombe\'92s characterization of consequentialism more generally that it views all consequences as \'93external.\'94 She puts the point in this way: \
\
>Now the consequentialist has no footing on which to say "This would be permissible, this not"; because by his own hypothesis, it is the consequences that are to decide, and he has no business to pretend that he can lay it down what possible twists a man could give doing this or that; the most he can say is: a man must not bring about this or that; he has no right to say he will, in an actual case, bring about such-and-such unless he does so-and-so.[@anscombe1958 13] \
\
I shall return to this discussion of external goods below in the teleological objection. \
\
The internal goal of farming is (by my hypothesis) the production of edible food; its practitioners *as farmers* are committed to this goal without any eye toward broader features of farming as a business. A farmer may attend conferences about the future of his field, but he does not do so in his strict role as farmer, but in his role as citizen or businessman. By contrast, the practice of farming demands specific virtues. A farmer must be honest in order to maintain positive relationships with various suppliers and buyers; a farmer must be courageous, willing to withstand real pain and risk possible harm for the sake of the good being pursued, in order to face unseasonable weather, illness, or other misfortune. \
\
### Self ###\
\
MacIntyre's account of virtue begins in terms of practices. Virtues sustain and eventually improve practices while vices enervate and eventually ruin them. A second layer of his account in *After Virtue* defines virtues as beneficial *to* human beings, human selves.[@macintyre1984after chapter 15.] Humans perform practices; humans are the bearers of virtues and vices. What is a human self? The Enlightenment picture of selfhood, personality, or agency is a radical divergence from the prior tradition. Drawing the contrast between MacIntyre\'92s view and the modern puts into clear relief the differing conceptions of the good, of nature, and of telos. \
\
The Enlightenment concept is the empty self. The self is not social *by nature*; it is atomic by nature and only social by choice, or contract, or artifice. The empty self does not have a history; the body arises from a biological history but the self emerges as it were from nowhere, suddenly possessed of detached freedom. The empty self does not have a naturally-ordained destiny; it is self-determining, self-legislating, and ultimately self-creating.\
\
John Horton and Susan Mendus summarize the contrast well enough to quote them in full:\
\
>Where Aristotle understood man as a creature with a definite function which he might fulfill or deny, modern morality sees man simply as a rational agent who has no true or definable purpose independent of his own will... By appealing to a telos, Aristotle was able to distinguish between the way we actually are and the way we should be. His conception of human beings as having a specific *telos* brought with it the possibility that we might fall short of the ideal... But with the rejection of Aristotelianism gain the rejection of any such distinction between what we are and what we should be. Post-Enlightenment man is seen as governed, not by a *telos* external to him, but simply by the dictates of his own inner reason... Thus the abandonment of an Aristotelian conception of the good has not only left us without standards by which to evaluate our moral arguments, it is also cast us adrift in the moral world. For Aristotle, a conception of the good for man has an essentially societal dimension.[@horton2015 6] \
\
The Enlightenment thinkers (such as Kant) and their heirs (such as John Rawls) reject inherent teleology and inherent sociality. Indeed, they celebrate the empty self. The elimination of these strictures seem an increase in freedom. But the Enlightenment picture of the empty self is, MacIntyre thinks, disastrously wrong. The strictures do not result in increased freedom but increase in anxiety and despair. \
\
It is difficult to understate the importance of this point about the self and its relation to not only virtue theory but ethical theory itself. Edward Oakes describes the removal of *telos* from our worldview as \'93perhaps the greatest category mistake ever made in the history of philosophy.\'94\
\
>That word \'93teleological\'94 is the key to MacIntyre\'92s solution, the loss of which is the cause of the catastrophe described in his science-fiction parable. Teleology is the study of final causes, goals, purposes, and aims: a style of explanation that saturates Aristotle\'92s philosophy. After the combined impact of Newton and Darwin, however, this type of explanation seems mostly 'quaint' and once Aristotle\'92s science seemed quaint, his ethics soon followed: when Newton demonstrated how motion can be better explained as resulting from the outcome of mechanical laws, and when Darwin posited natural selection as the \'93mechanism\'94 for explaining an organ\'92s functionality, the use of teleology in ethics was doomed.\
>This is perhaps the greatest category mistake ever made in the history of philosophy. Emptying moral discourse of teleological concepts because of the perceived impact of Newton and Darwin has been for MacIntyre the catastrophe of our times.[@oakes1996] \
\
It will come as no surprise that MacIntyre\'92s view of the self, the narrative of life, the end of humanity, ethics, and rationality itself come to be built on the notion of telos, restored to its proper place. In the modernist picture, I am a moral subject. I am a self among other selves. My present self is a time slice of my overall total self (through time), I am able to know facts and value values, I have my own good separate and apart from your good and that of my family and community and society. In the traditional picture, I am a moral subject. I am a self among other selves. In the present, I owe my being and personhood to the past (especially my family who biologically gave me being) and psychologically and culturally to my tradition. I am able to know truth, for there is only one manifold of truths. My good is that of my community; my community\'92s good is that of mine. These data are fundamental. \
\
On this issue, MacIntyre argues the standard communitarian line.[Cf. @taylor1985atomism] The detachable empty self, divorced from past and from community is not the real self.  While this section is not the place to adjudicate this dispute, a few comments are worth making to clarify MacIntyre\'92s location on the conceptual map.\
\
Two considerations are often cited as evidence of the communitarian view of the self. First is the sociological and anthropological point that each of us belongs by nature to a family (via genetics) and a culture (via upbringing). There is no Tarzan or Mowgli raised outside a culture. Rather, it is in social institutions (clubs, churches, schools, guilds, towns) that practices are learned, taught, preserved, extended. In social conditions we develop what virtues we may possess and what vices we may suffer from. We are trained in cowardice and vice by "corrupt traditions.\'94[@macintyre1984after 223] \
\
Second is the observation that *we do bear* responsibility for the actions of our ancestors. One example likely to be persuasive to modern liberal thinkers is that of transatlantic slavery. A present day black American's identity is in part defined by the relationship of 18th century blacks to 18th century whites. Similarly, present day Irishman's identity is in part defined by the relationship of 18th century Englishman to the 18th century Irish slaves. If the notion of the detachable self were true, then my personal identity would have nothing to do with the trials and triumphs of those in the past; I could justly deny any part in pre-existing structures. \
\
By contrast, it seems that each of us takes an identity, at least in part, from our past and from our tradition. \
\
### *Telos* and happiness ### \
\
For MacIntyre, the loss of *telos* (human-nature-as-it-should-be) is one of the chief if not the chief error of Enlightenment moralities. Human-nature-as-it-is is a topic for both philosophers and social scientists: psychologists, sociologists, anthropologists, etc. But *telos* unifies human nature as it is with ethical principles and realistic ideals by which we can become something other than what we are at present. \'93To travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive\'94 and yet a having in mind a clear *telos* is a precondition for traveling hopefully. \
\
In the seminal text of the \'93Aristotelian tradition\'94, the *Nicomachean Ethics*, MacIntyre finds the view that humans \'93like the members of all other species, have a specific nature; and that nature is such that they have certain aims and goals, such that they move by nature towards a specific telos. The good is defined in terms of their specific characteristics\'94.[@macintyre1984after 148] For Aristotle the virtues are \'93precisely those qualities the possession of which will enable an individual to achieve eudaemonia and the lack of which will frustrate his movement toward that telos.\'94[@macintyre1984after 148]\
\
We can see that Aristotle\'92s account includes these ingredients, all of which interlock with the others to form a coherent picture of a human being or community being excellent at life. (A) Human nature is part of nature; and for Aristotle \'93nature\'94 extends to include formal, final, material, and efficient causes. Also, our end and (to some degree) the qualities that enable us to achieve that end are natural to us. (B) The virtues are those qualities that enable persons and communities to achieve their end, which is eudaemonia. (D) The *telos* of humanity is its (natural) final cause, its end. Eudaemonia is not pleasure, not wealth, not just wisdom, but virtuous activity.\
\
MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue is \'93neo-Aristotelian\'94 in that it borrows from but also contrast with Aristotle\'92s. (MacIntyre, for instance, denies that Aristotle\'92s virtues are so timeless, abstract, and generically human as Aristotle would make them appear; they are partly indexed to fourth century, upper-class, educated Athenian culture.) \
\
His provisional conception of our human *telos* is this:  \'93The good life for man is the life spent in seeking for the good life for man, and the virtues necessary for the seeking are those which will enable us to understand what more and what else the good life for man is."[@macintyre1984after 210] Our *telos* is to be free to pursue our telos. MacIntyre is not a eudaemonist. At least, he is not obviously a straightforward eudaemonist; this conception of the human *telos* is more vague than Aristotle\'92s or Aquinas\'92s. Perhaps it is only provisional because it is so extremely indeterminate. How could it be made more determinate? The virtues needed to preserve the quest for the good, he suggests, may illumine \'93what else\'94 our *telos* consists in.  \
\
This essentially historicist view of human life is key to MacIntyre\'92s virtue theory. To see why, we need to think about narrative. In the minds of many contemporaries, human life is broken into isolate stages (childhood, adolescence, old age, etc.). The human self is isolated from its present community and from its position in relation to the past. By contrast, MacIntyre\'92s synoptic vision of human life is narrative.[See especially @macintyre1984after chapter 15] Human life is a unity, from birth to death (for individuals) and from emergence to dissolution (for groups and traditions). A human social group is a unity of members, more like an organism than  just an aggregate of atoms.  Narrative is not \'93disguise or decoration\'94 but an essential feature of the working of our minds and (arguably) an essential feature of the unfolding of reality through time. Narrative is not only a way of telling ourselves intelligible stories about what has happened, but is the very stuff of life. \
\
The end of our narrative (the terminus) is, of course, individual death. But narratives also have an end (goal). He says, \'93We live out our lives, both individually and in our relationships with each other, in the light of certain conception of a possible shared future, a future in which certain possibilities beckon us forward and others repel us, some seem already foreclosed and others perhaps inevitable."[@macintyre1984after 215] The unity of that narrative lies not only in our identity as a central character of our story, and our place in larger narrative contexts, but in the single *telos* governing all the moments of our \'93quest.\'94 Of course, quests do not always achieve their object. The narrative of human life always reaches its end (in death) but doesn\'92t always reach its end (in success, achievement of telos). But to see our whole life synoptically requires seeing it as a narrative.\
\
With this in mind, the relation between virtue and *telos* comes more clearly to light. Since not only individual agents but whole communities and institutions (and the whole human race!) are aimed at a telos, the presence of virtues sustains practices and traditions. The absence of the relevant virtues \'93weakens and destroys\'94 practices and whole traditions.[@macintyre1984after 223] The absence of the higher level virtues, weakens and destroys the generically human goods: minimally, the freedom to pursue our telos. \
\
MacIntyre says: \
\
>The virtues therefore are to be understood as those dispositions which will not only sustain practices and enable us to achieve the goods internal to practices, but which will also sustain us in the relevant kind of quest for the good, by enabling us to overcome the charms, dangers, temptations and distractions which we encounter, and which will furnish us with increasing self-knowledge and increasing knowledge of the good.[@macintyre1984after 219] \
\
The \'93quest for the good\'94 is necessary but not sufficient. It is good, and it cannot be completed without relevant virtues. And yet there is more to the good. So that first provisional conception of *telos* as indeterminate may be right. For if a person or community could secure the freedom to pursue their telos, they could secures an ethical and political space within which to develop higher-order virtues. \
\
These higher-order virtues are the context for and hence limit and guide the other lower-order virtues. Still further, social and political virtues are also the context, limit, and guide to individual virtues. Social and political virtues are \'93required to sustain the kind of households and the kind of political communities in which men and women can seek for the good together and the virtues necessary for philosophical enquiry about the character of the good\'94[@macintyre1984after 219]\
\
Hence, MacIntyre is not a eudaimonist. At least, he is not obviously a straightforward eudaimonist. He seems to be saying that our *telos* is to be free to pursue our telos. But this is not quite correct. He concludes that the human *telos* (whatever it might robustly turn out to be) includes minimally the freedom to explore "what else" the *telos* might be. It is not vacuous to conclude that the virtues needed to achieve this (extremely indeterminate) goal themselves indirectly make room for and might directly illumine \'93what else\'94 our *telos* consists in. It may turn out (and his later writings are more explicit about it) that the determinate *telos* of a given tradition is a more determinate conception of eudaemonia. \
\
I defer a full discussion of teleology until the next section. If we return to the concept of practice with the *teleological* and *social* properties firmly in mind, then MacIntyre's account becomes more clear. Farming is not a solitary and abstract activity but is always undertaken by farmers who apprenticed (under parents or mentors). Farmers who master the practice become not only beneficiaries but benefactors, and may innovate new or better ways of farming that can be passed on to the next apprentice or child. \
\
Thus far, we have seen that MacIntyre presents virtues as those qualities acquired by individual selves in the performance of practices that serve the intrinsic teloi or ends of those practices. \
\
\
### An initial worry \
\
One worry that many readers have shared is that MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue, thus far, is all too easily seen as a type of relativism: Is torture a \'93practice\'94? Is grand theft auto a practice that one can be excellent at? It certainly seems reasonable to think that some acquired qualities allow one to achieve the goods internal to car stealing. MacIntyre vehemently denies being a relativist and devotes the whole of *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* to capturing the truth in relativity while escaping relativism.[@macintyre1984after xii-xiii in the 25th anniversary edition] \
\
He admits that there *might* be evil practices. (We can add that institutions or traditions can be evil.) If so, then some \'93virtues\'94 that enable the achievement of goods and the health and continuance of institutions would be bad qualities. To avoid relativism, he must say something to do justice to the assumption that virtues are not neutral with respect to ends, but are actually *good* for their possessor. He must put practice into a broader teleological context and question whether life *as a whole* can be virtuous. He does say that the virtue of \'93integrity or constancy\'85 of singleness of purpose in a whole life.\'94[@macintyre1984after 203] (Integrity is not our telos, but it is a necessary condition.) Even putting human life into a unified, narrative context does not ultimately solve the problem of relativism. For we still might worry: is there a single *telos* for human life? Is there a unity to all the virtues such that \'93wicked virtues\'94 can be excluded? And if so, is it rooted in our \'93metaphysical biology\'94 as Aristotle thought? \
\
A fuller discussion of relativism I return to below, clarifying the charge and rebutting it. For now, the charge of relativism effectively motivates MacIntyre\'92s third layer in the *After Virtue* account. His answer to this worry is, I believe, the crux of his whole theory of ethics. It appeals to two concepts that are, for him, intimately bound up with each other. The two concepts are practical reason and human nature. (In the next section, I shall show how practical rationality and tradition meld into one concept.) I shall discuss each in turn and attempt to show how they are unified in MacIntyre\'92s thought. \
\
### We are practical reasoners ###\
\
I would like to add details from *Dependent Rational Animals* before turning to *Whose Justice?* The project of *Dependent Rational Animals* is to insist that (a) human beings are animals even if we are animals of a particular and unusual sort; and that (b) our dependence and vulnerability are as morally significant as our independence, autonomy, or self-sufficiency. In other words, there are virtues of both autonomy *and* dependence. The book also contends that (c) certain social arrangements are conducive to the transmission and sustenance of both kinds of virtue.  \
\
Let\'92s consider a key quotation on each of these themes. Regarding (a) the notion that we are unusual animals, MacIntyre argues at length that the human differentia (be it language, reason, practical reason, self-consciousness, or what have you) does not eradicate the commonalities between us and other animals. He says: \
\
>\'93I shall contend that although our differences from all other species are certainly of crucial importance, it is also important that both initially in our earliest childhood activities and to some extent thereafter we comport ourselves towards the world in much the same way as other intelligent animals. Indeed our ability to transcend those limitations depends in part upon certain of those animal characteristics among them the nature of our identity.\'94[@macintyre1999dependent 8] \
\
The point, I take it, is that we are practical reasoners. Imagine any scenario of humans gathering and doing what comes naturally, and it will involve group deliberation about what to do: A group of high school students exiting class for lunch stop in the hallway and argue about where to sit; a senate sub-committee convenes to deliberate on whether to pull federal funding from a particular health organization; a U.N. Assembly convenes to deliberate whether to place sanctions on a recalcitrant nation; a philosophy professor chats with the department chair about how to boost the number of majors; a father and mother sip wine, after the kids are in bed, while arguing over the grocery budget. The pattern each instantiates is a group of human beings engaging in practical reason \'97 a community thinking what to do. It is difficult to get out of bed in the morning without engaging in practical reasoning with others. Abduct the principle from the particulars: human beings, us, are practical reasoners in community. We are practical reasoners in communities. \
\
This is the first point. The second is that our lives are not lived out as adults, but progress from young, to middle aged, to old. Regarding point (b), he argues that vulnerability, dependence, affliction characteristic especially of early childhood and old age, but also of any sickness, injury, or misfortune are highly morally significant.  As he says:  \
\
>\'93Virtues of independent rational agency need for their adequate exercise to be accompanied by what I shall call the virtues of acknowledge dependence and that a failure to understand this is apt to secure some features of rational agency. Moreover both sets of virtues are needed in order to actualize the distinctive potentialities that are specific to the human rational animal. Identifying how and why they are needed is a prerequisite for understanding their central place in the kind of human life through which human flourishing can be achieved.\'94[@macintyre1999dependent 8] \
\
Finally, regarding (c), MacIntyre argues that \'93neither the modern state nor the modern family can supply that kind of political and social association that is needed.\'94[@macintyre1999dependent 9] \
\
How do the arguments of *After Virtue* connect to these points? We may fairly draw this connection: since human beings are animals, social animals, and social practically-reasoning animals, our account of ends and the virtues that enable them must be sensitive to all three of these points. \
\
Whatever definition of virtue we settle on will generate a \'93list\'94 of virtues. Whatever virtues are included on the list had better not exclude virtues that make human life possible; it had better not exclude (as Aristotle did) women and manual workers from the very possibility of developing virtues. \
\
We can see how the structural limits on what it means to be human begin to set boundaries on our ethical theories. Empirical study cannot tell us what is good, but it can set limits on *what is not* going to be good for creatures like us. Biologically, we are animals evolved from simpler animals.[@macintyre1999dependent x] But our practical reasoning sets us apart in some respects. We have the burden and responsibility to set the course for our own lives, and to care for the dependent among us who are not yet practical reasoners or who are no longer such. \
\
The practice of practical reasoning is a universal human practice. This makes sense of why educational institutions (as one example) are so important. Without them, virtues \'97 and the goods open to the virtuous \'97 are liable to remain unavailable to many. Vices harm the dependent and restrict them from becoming independent practical reasoners. \
\
MacIntyre is first and foremost a philosopher of *practical reason*. Weinstein says that the primary theme of his work has not been goodness or virtue but practical rationality itself.[@weinstein2003macintyre %%page number%%] In this he defends the assumption that morality is not a special domain of practical life but simply is the domain of *living well*.  *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* and *Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry* take up themes about rationality per se, while *After Virtue* and *Dependent Rational Animals* follow the Aristotelian pattern of treating ethical issues as species of practical rationality. \
\
Our human nature as dependent practical reasoners also clarifies why prudence or *phronesis* is the master virtue. It complements and completes every other moral virtue. MacIntyre defends Aristotle\'92s conception of the practical syllogism wherein the major premise is an evaluative judgment about a virtue or action-type; the minor premise is a truth judgment about a situation or action-token; the conclusion is *an action*. For example, \'93I ought to do (the courageous thing of) resisting a student\'92s attempt to bribe me for a higher grade. This student is attempting to bribe me for a higher grade. Therefore, in this case, I ought to do (the courageous thing of) resisting this student\'92s attempt to bribe me.\'94 Without moral virtues, prudence is simply the knowledge of *what is to be done*. Without prudence, the moral virtues are simply skills or habits that might be serviceable to bad ends; one might be excellent in achieving *what is not be done*. \
\
The mastery of prudence over other virtues also unifies the other virtues. *Dependent Rational Animals* advances MacIntyre\'92s virtue theory in that it supplies a basis for the unity of intellectual and moral virtues, for the unity of the various moral virtues, and for unity of the various stages of the narrative of *human* life. The paradoxical notion of \'93wicked virtues\'94 are explained only with this broad context of human life, and with this definition of human nature. As Christopher Lutz says, \'93The strength of MacIntyre's account of practices is that the pursuit of excellence in a practice entails the pursuit of virtue, but if practices can be evil, and virtues can "enable us to achieve those goods which are internal to\'94 such an evil practice, and virtues can be anything at all.[@lutz2004tradition 101]\
\
Although these responses to the initial worry about relativism may bring up more questions than they answer, they at least present a coherent picture of human life and the qualities needed to live it well. \
\
### Section Conclusion\
\
While there is much more that could be said, let's call this adequate and consider some of the responses to MacIntyre's work. \
\
MacIntyre thinks that "human beings need the virtues" because they are intrinsically good and useful for transforming communities and persons.[@macintyre1999dependent] At the practical level of daily life, a small community (such as a family or town or university) does well to organize themselves around a common vision of what is good and a common conception of what qualities will help everyone to attain that good. At the theoretical level of philosophical ethics, the concepts of virtue, practical wisdom, and happiness supply for moral theory what many modern moralities have not: a clear, coherent, useful, and justifiable theory that grounds a rational pursuit of the good life and resolvable moral disagreements. \
\
For MacIntyre, moral enquiry is a practice that takes place within a tradition, a community. It can and should be undertaken by regular folk, not just specialists in philosophy. And the goal of such enquiry is discovering what is really admirable and pursuing it, becoming more admirable moral agents through the acquisition of virtues. Virtues are acquired traits that enable the achievement of goods internal to the practices, those traits that sustain traditions, and those traits by which we overcome perennial temptations to lead lives that are divided, deviant, or contrary to our true nature. \
\
\
## Objections \
\
MacIntyre\'92s work has been influential. Yet he has opponents on all sides. It will be impossible, of course, to do mention let alone do justice to all the responses offered by MacIntyre's sizable crowd of audience members, interlocutors, and critics.  Instead, we shall pick out just a few that seem to me the most helpful.\
\
In the following sub-sections, I group his three types of critics. Then, I articulate and discuss key objections especially from his \'93encyclopedist\'94 critics. \
\
The primary objection regarding virtue as he defines it relative to practices, the narrative of human life, and tradition, is the charge of relativism. This is a weighty objection and deserves almost a whole chapter in its own right. \
\
A related objection regarding tradition-constituted rationality charges MacIntyre with an incoherent definition of tradition; if some traditions are truly incommensurable to each other, and MacIntyre himself is truly situated within a tradition, then writing a book like *After Virtue* which is written from a universal, objective, view-from-nowhere should be impossible. Writing *After Virtue* and defending a theory of virtue amounts to a performative contradiction. \
\
The third objection regarding teleology and the \'93quest\'94 for human happiness or fulfillment is twofold: on the one hand, it seems that modern moral philosophy can get along quite well without teleology. On the other hand, even if it couldn\'92t, then that seems to indict philosophical ethics entirely as unscientific, hopeless, superstition. \
\
I summarize the secondary literature on these points, as well as MacIntyre\'92s replies, and attempt to adjudicate the conflict. Finally, I shall close with a reflection on why his philosophical ethics is so liable to misunderstanding and, to some, so infuriating. The same features of his theory that infuriate some magnetically fascinate others and so reflection on them may, I believe, illuminate MacIntyre\'92s distinctive legacy. \
\
\
### Three types of critic\
\
I think it also helpful to group the *types* of critic before stating the *critiques*. The three rival versions of moral enquiry, you will recall, are tradition, encyclopedia, and genealogy. Tradition MacIntyre endorses. His first group of critics are \'93traditionalists\'94,  fellow Thomists or others within the broader Aristotelian tradition. For instance, Robert P. George and John Haldane ostensibly share but also dispute his Thomism. (Since I am not a Thomist and do not have a dog in that fight, I shall not dig deeply into these worries.)\
\
A second group of postmodern philosophers are \'93genealogists.\'94 Such readers agree with his critique of modernity but reject his solution. They agree that our choice is between \'93Nietzsche or Aristotle\'94 but choose Nietzsche over Aristotle. Some encyclopedists have even argued (as a critique) that MacIntyre\'92s philosophy leads to Nietzscheanism. And perhaps Nietzscheanism is true. Philippa Foot argued that analytic philosophers do not take Nietzsche's immoralist challenge seriously enough.[@foot2001natural chapter 7] Perhaps MacIntyre is correct to set up modern moral philosophies as (failed) masks for Nietzsche, the only alternative to which is Aristotle. Even if the dilemma is correct, perhaps he chooses the wrong side. All moral discourse that appeals to rationality, divine law, human nature, tradition or any other such nonsense beside the individual will is a mask. The only real and authentic spring of morality is, of course, the Will to Power. \
\
But I think to concede this is to give up on ethics as philosophy -- and perhaps to give up on philosophy as a whole. If it were true, I would have to stop writing now. \
\
The third group of critics are modern philosophers that are (by MacIntyre\'92s lights) \'93encyclopedists.\'94 They belong to the tradition of modernity. Such readers (including Martha Nussbaum and Thomas Nagel) find MacIntyre\'92s diagnosis misguided and so find his solutions needless and radical. In their critiques, they object to the historical grouping of all \'93modern moral philosophies\'94 together and to the quite despairing treatment of them. They deny that our choice is *either* \'93Nietzsche or Aristotle.  They defend some form of modern moral philosophy against the debunking arguments MacIntyre somewhat shares with postmodern philosophers. Their biggest worry is relativism about rationality, both theoretical and moral. These objections see the emphasis on traditions and practices, and tradition-specific standards of reason and justice, as incommensurable with the ambitions of universal, timeless, non-perspectival moral truths. A Kantian or utilitarian can defend his favored rational, secular morality.  Although MacIntyre is a successful analytic philosopher, most of his influence has not come from within analytic ethics. (I treat 'success' as a function of how often your work is cited either by defenders or detractors.) I think his fellows have been tempted to reject him because he is so critical of professional philosophy.[@hauerwas2007 put it this way: A philosopher, he insists, should try to express the concepts embedded in the practices of our lives in order to help us live morally worthy lives. The professionalization of philosophy into a technical field\'97what might be called the academic captivity of philosophy\'97reflects (and serves to legitimate) the compartmentalization of the advanced capitalistic social orders that produce our culture of experts, those strange creatures of authority in modernity."] Some have suggested that his theory amounts to an abandonment of philosophy in favor of religion. For now, I would caution against this interpretation. Instead, for those of us who are sympathetic to his methods and conclusions, the goal is to extend the tradition by pruning and cultivating; for those who are not sympathetic, the goal should be to reflect upon one\'92s own tradition, and to exercise philosophical imagination and consider a vision in which virtues as qualities that enable us to pursue the goods internal to practices, and see practices themselves as embedded in traditions which are historically extended arguments.\
\
### Relativism objections\
\
The most recurring objection to MacIntyre\'92s ethical philosophy is a cluster of worries about relativism. How do we make sense of this objection? We have to stipulate what relativism is. The constellation of (sometimes conflicting) positions that fly under heading of 'relativism' is no small task. Instead of attempting to sift them, I shall follow Stephn Lutz: \'93Relativism\'94 is a thesis about the conclusion of enquiries; every would-be knower wants truth, but is limited by its contingent, historical conditions and/or the perspective of the enquirer. Hence no conclusion is *true* in the sense the enquirer wanted.[@lutz2004tradition 66] To the relativist, the knower's individual or cultural perspective is both starting point and ending point of any enquiry. \
\
In MacIntyre's terms, virtue, it seems, is relative to practices, to communities, to institutions, or to rival traditions of moral enquiry. Acceptance of a tradition entails acceptance of *a* particular definition of virtue and list of virtues; denial of a tradition (or denial of *tradition itself*) entails the rejection of any definition of virtue and list of virtues. He maintains that it is possible and common for traditions to be incommensurable with each other. So conceptions of virtue can be incommensurable with each other. In light of this interpretation of his ethical theory, all MacIntyre has done is given a kind of anthropological account of what people from that tradition consider to be virtues, not what virtues *actually are*. The inquirer interested in, say, which tradition is *correct* or which version of moral enquiry is *correct* is at a loss. \
\
Stephen Lutz summarizes nine objections that might fall under the heading of the \'93relativism objection.\'94[@lutz2004tradition 74ff.] Of these, three are simply misunderstandings, three legitimate calls for clarification, and three put real pressure on the limits of MacIntyre\'92s theory. Whether the pressures ultimately amounts to an objection depends on whether the limits of the theory correspond to the *the actual limits* on enquiry. While I cannot summarize all nine of these objections, in the next section I shall discuss five of those I take to be most cutting. \
\
### Tradition-constituted rationality objections ###\
\
The set of relativism objections pushes MacIntyre (and us) to articulate more clearly the supporting theory of practical rationality. For MacIntyre, ethical reasoning *just is* practical reasoning; practical reasoning is a mode of *reasoning* per se. This move does not erase a worry relativistic morality; it passes the buck to relativistic rationality. The apparent incommensurability of moralities -- including varying conceptions of virtue -- passes the buck to varying conceptions of rationality. For this reason, Stephen Lutz' last objection pertaining to relativism I categorize as an objection pertaining \'93tradition-constituted rationality.\'94 The objection is threefold: is MacIntyre\'92s concept of tradition-constituted rationality even coherent? If so, is it clear enough to be an indispensable feature of an ethical theory? If so, then how can MacIntyre avoid the charge of relativism at this level? \
\
Here is a reason to think his tradition-constituted theory of rationality is incoherent. Varying traditions can disagree about a proposition P. Perhaps tradition A finds P true and B finds it false, on best evidence and sufficient reflection. But incommensurable traditions disagree about the standards (say, S1 and S2) by which to judge the truth and even the rationality of other traditions. So A finds P true and rational (by S1) while B finds P false and irrational (by S2). They genuinely disagree. And A judges B to be irrational (since they deny that P) while B returns the favor (since A affirms that P). \
\
According to MacIntyre's account of how members of a tradition undergo epistemological crisis and begin to examine the resources of rival traditions, we tell a little story of Annabelle. Annabelle is member of tradition A discovers problems with her own tradition. Let's imagine that P entails both (Q and ~Q). She cannot deny P nor can she affirm the contradiction. (Suppose that by A's standards of rationality, S1 contradictory propositions cannot both be true in the same sense.) After some searching about, she concludes she cannot solve the problem and cannot even discover the rational resources with which to solve them. Being passingly familiar with tradition B, she becomes curious why her friends who belong to that tradition deny P and exercises her philosophical imagination to begin to see B "from within." Tradition B is compelling, since it denies that P. She "converts" traditions. However, there is a problem with tradition B, and that is that the standard of rationality of B (S2) allows its adherents to affirm a contradiction. So now, even though Annabelle left A to avoid having to affirm a contradiction (by her standard of rationality S1) now that she has joined B she no longer sees it as irrational to affirm the contradiction (by her new standard of rationality S2). This is surely an odd conclusion. \
\
A second variation on the same problem is this: how would a born-and-raised member of tradition B, affirming S2, ever come to epistemological crisis? Discontentment with contradictions is not available to B members *ex hypothesi*. They do not see affirming a contradiction as irrational. Their tradition can bear a hundred instances of (Q and ~Q).\
\
The odd conclusion of this thought experiment is a dilemma: either such nonsense is possible, or embracing the law of non-contradiction is a universal standard of rationality in every tradition. The latter option seems to indicate that traditions A and B are *not* actually incommensurable, since they share one rather substantial presupposition. The flow of members from one to the other is intelligible. The former option allows A and B to be incommensurable, but seems to freeze members in their own tradition. Members of A would have no (rational) justification for joining B, while members of B would have no (rational) justification for leaving B. \
\
### *Telos* ###\
\
The third and final major objection I shall consider pertains to teleology. I hope my summary above was adequate to demonstrate MacIntyre's case for rejecting the modern encyclopedist tradition and for returning, instead, to the Aristotelian tradition is predicated on the importance of retaining *telos* and the disastrous consequences of excising *telos* from our understanding of ourselves, our practices, our lives, and our traditions. \
\
This objection is so powerful, and the prejudices and misconceptions surrounding teleology so thick, I shall need more than one chapter to fully respond to it. I think an adequate response can be made. But philosophers' opposition to some forms of teleology is visceral opposition. It will take some philosophical digging around in the structural foundations of our thinking to make progress.  \
\
Notwithstanding the general difficulty of this objection, in this chapter I shall present two initial forms that are especially problematic for MacIntyre's narrative. MacIntyre has it that modern moral philosophy surgically excised *telos* from natural science, psychology, and ethics. So the first form is this objection is to deny that narrative. Perhaps modern moral philosophy is not so anti-teleological as all that. Kant's categorical imperative, much vaunted for its austere duty for the sake of duty, is actually aimed at perfection.[@ward1971kant] Keith Ward argued with some impatience almost 40 years ago (10 years before *After Virtue*'s first edition) that Kant should not be interpreted as commending duty as some abstract, context-free obligation. He says: \
\
>Kant's position is not merely that one must conceive oneself as setting up a purposive order of Nature, according to universal laws, as though one could arbitrarily choose anything whatsoever as one's purpose. One can see this if one takes Kant's list of examples of moral duties in the *Metaphysic of Morals* [sic]. Masturbation is against the *purposes of Nature*, in forming the sexual organs; suicide contravenes *Nature's purpose* in establishing self-love in order to preserve life... Finally, "holiness of will" must be pursued, as this expresses the absolute worth of the human person, in its freedom from sensuous impulses and its transcendence of Nature.[@ward1971kant 341] \
\
A second iteration of the same objection in its first form is that it seems that consequentialism is teleological in a more plausible sense of telos. For consequences are *ends* of actions. I go to work *in order to* earn a paycheck at the end of the month; the consequence (my paycheck) is the goal or purpose or point of the action (going to work). So perhaps virtue ethics can be synthesized with consequentialism. \
\
Furthermore, Cummiskey has argued that Kant can be understood as a consequentialist of sorts.[@cummiskey1996kantian] The proposal is that Kant's *justification* for moral normative principles was a brute, formal, categorical imperative, but the *content* of such normative principles included agents and the goods they aim to attain. Happiness can be valued as an imperfect duty, though rational agency must be valued as a perfect duty. Without entering into all the interesting details at this juncture, the thought is that perhaps a (thoroughly modern) moral philosophy like deontology can be synthesized with natural teleology. \
\
A second form of this objection about teleology is that ethics can get along well enough without intrinsic *teloi* guiding or forming the natural end of our actions. }