{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ### Section Introduction ###\
\
\
While I agree with much of MacIntyre\'92s picture of the development of western civilization, there is far more in his proposals than I can comment on, let alone defend. Instead, I\'92ll surface and discuss a few particular objections. \
\
MacIntyre is a theorist of rationality (and of practical rationality and hence virtue). Hence rationally to assess his theory requires thinking through our own theory of rationality. But thinking about rationality is thinking through our own thinking. The errors we make in thinking are likely to be underscored by our attempts to *think them through*. The Greek proverb is: \'93If water chokes us, what shall we drink?\'94 If something is deeply wrong with the way we think, how can theorizing about rationality right the wrong? The Latin proverb (from a very different context) is \'93Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?\'94 \'97 who will guard the guards themselves? I believe the answer to the rhetorical question is no one at all can guard the guards. If water chokes us, there is nothing we can do to wash it down and clear our throat. Similarly, some of the errors MacIntyre diagnoses in thinkers who belong to the modern liberal Enlightenment tradition will be invisible to those thinkers. \
\
Even if MacIntyre\'92s diagnosis is *correct*, especially if it is correct, the patient will find the diagnosis unintelligible, even irrational. Insofar as the patient finds any parts of his theory intelligible, they will seem radical, disastrous in their social implications, and destructive of the very nature and purpose of education. The reason these appearances will be insuperable to MacIntyre\'92s patient is because the patient is, by his lights, self-deceived. He or she simply denies being part of a tradition, and hence denies having a particular (rather than universal) tradition-bound conception of rationality, and hence denies having a particular, tradition-bound conception of the good (perhaps the good is unbounded freedom to follow the moral law, or to pursue happiness,, and justice unfettered equality). Modernity is the \'93tradition-less tradition\'94 and hence *must* deny tradition to be consistent with itself. \
\
### Audience is discontented folks ###\
\
But *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* and others are directed toward the discontented liberal modern. This patient comes to MacIntyre with manifesting symptoms. MacIntyre offers one possible diagnosis, and the patient\'92s job is to investigate further. The patient needs philosophical imagination to even *consider* the possibility of another truth. The patient needs patience, intellectual courage, and self-reflection. The patient needs to sit in front of the proverbial mirror and mouth the words, (a) \'93I am part of a tradition\'94 and (b) \'93my tradition might be inadequate,\'94 and (c) \'93that other tradition might have the resources more adequately to address the intellectual and practical problems that I now see are insuperable to my tradition.\'94 \
\
It should come as no surprise to us, if we have come to terms with the debate, that both sides think the other side not merely *wrong* but *irrational*. Two opponents within a tradition can think the other side mistaken but fundamentally rational. Two opponents from opposing traditions more often think the other side \'93crazy\'94 or \'93nuts\'94 or \'93mad\'94, \'93bonkers\'94, or some other synonym for less-than-rational. \
\
Nevertheless, some (like Nagel) are surprised and perhaps even offended when the religious philosopher (like MacIntyre) concludes upon decades of reflection that his secular colleague is less than rational. No! Nagel protests, the religious philosophers is less than rational \'97 my secularism is by definition an allegiance to rationality over dogma. But Lutz rightly disentangles this web of definitional fiat and counter-fiat. If Nagel\'92s secularism is a dogma, and one unsustainable after decades of the most open-minded reflection upon best evidence, then the secular philosopher is not just mistaken but irrational. If this result seems surprising to the reader, it is a likely sign that MacIntyre\'92s theory has not yet been grasped. \
\
Nagel\'92s inability or unwillingness to consider that his secularism is a dogma or ideology would put disadvantage him relative to MacIntyre. For Nagel\'92s part, he *does* self-reflectively consider it, but does not express the further willingness to imaginatively and philosophically entertain the opposing tradition\'92s account. \
\
Enormous metaphilosophical disputes are in the offing. One side just isn\'92t doing philosophy anymore. My only point here is that which side it is is far from clear. Or, put differently, it is all too clear to modern, liberal, secular philosophers that MacIntyerean-type \'93philosophy\'94 just isn\'92t.  It is all to clear to modern, Aristotelian, religious philosophers that Nagalean \'93philosophy\'94 just isn\'92t. \
\
}