{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 #### Relativism Objection
\b0 \
\
Perhaps the most recurring objection to MacIntyre\'92s ethical philosophy is a cluster of worries about relativism. Virtue, it seems, is relative to practices, to communities, to institutions, or to \'93rival versions of moral inquiry\'94 \'97 in a word, virtue is relative to traditions, and traditions are (or might be) incommensurable to each other. Acceptance of a tradition entails acceptance of *a* particular definition of virtue and list of virtues; denial of a tradition (or denial of *tradition itself*) entails the rejection of any definition of virtue and list of virtues. In light of this interpretation of his ethical theory, all MacIntyre has done is given a kind of anthropological account of what people from that group consider to be virtues, not what virtues actually are. The inquirer interested in, say, which tradition is *correct* or which version of moral inquiry is *correct* is at a loss. \
\
I should point out that accusing a theory of relativism is only an \'93accusation\'94 if relativism is false. Relativists rejoice. MacIntyre, in their view, is an aid in the fight of undermining the kind of philosophical ethics that arrogates itself as objective, universal, and absolute. The relativist of morality (and what\'92s more, the relativist of rationality) is not my primary audience, so I shall assume that relativism is false or at least undesirable, and treat the charge of relativism as an accusation. \
\

\b #### Relativism Objection Reply 
\b0 \
\
MacIntyre has responded to (and he thinks refuted) the charge of relativism multiple times, in his primary works and in \'93responses to critics.\'94 Yet the stain of relativism remains, for many, in the image of MacIntyre. \
\
Stating this objection adequately is important to both understanding and critiquing MacIntyre. I argue that several of his critics misunderstand the dialectic and criticize errors MacIntyre agrees are errors, and errors he does not make. But even after clarifying the obscure points of the dialectic MacIntyre does endorse, the objection can be resolved but not finally refuted. Rather, the resolution of the criticism  can only come through self-reflection by the critics on themselves; hence MacIntyre\'92s dialectic, properly understood, invites even critics to self-reflection. This is a kind of *resolution* of the criticism. For, to accept this invitation is, in some sense, to join MacIntyre in the inquiry, which is to either lay down the criticism or persist in making it from a new vantage point within the inquiry. By contrast, to deny the invitation is not *strictly speaking an objection* but a sociological or psychological move, a decision not to become part of that inquiry. This not the \'93victory\'94 of the objection over MacIntyre\'92s theory, but a refusal to allow MacIntyre\'92s theory to define the terms of the inquiry. \
\
#### Relativism Objection\
\
Stephen Lutz summarizes nine objections that might fall under the heading of the \'93relativism objection.\'94[@lutz2004tradition 74ff.] That of Susan Feldman misinterprets MacIntyre\'92s project as a (failed, incoherent) attempt to resolve factious, subjective ethical disputes by judging them from an abstract, objective, ideal observer. According to Lutz, MacIntyre accepts \'93relativity\'94 as a condition of inquiry but denies \'93relativism\'94 as the necessary conclusion of all inquiries. From the historically- and socially-situated position of inquiry, a philosopher (he argues) may indeed find truth. \
\
\
\
}