{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ### Potential\
\
The point of these reflections has been to bear out the truth of the generic that human beings are practical, rational animals. The first is that I must hasten to add that "humans are practical, rational animals" is a generic and so it admits of exceptions. \
\
Generics describe a life form well only when the sample includes exemplary instances of the species \'97 not young, immature, ill, or injured instances. Especially in the case of young organisms we need to invoke the notion of *potential*. Even single celled organisms have the potential to reproduce and develop. Scientists do not judge the characteristics of a newly discovered species by examining its young. \
\
The same point can be applied to those organisms, who by injury or illness, will never reveal the potentials inherit in their life form. Although that individual instance may be imperfectly actuating its species, it is still a member of the species. \
\
The importance of this point blocks a monstrous thought that humans who are not rational are not *"really"* human. Anacephalic babies are not even potentially rational, for they lack the subvenient brain structure necessary for rational consciousness, yet they are recognizably *human* (they are not opossums), just defectively so. (A war veterans is still human even if he or she is no longer bipedal!) Injury, illness, genetic defect, radiation poisoning, and any number of other negative factors may render a human being sub-rational. Coma, mental illness, and other factors may render a human being non-practical (unable to direct his or her own life to a normal degree).\
\
And an uncharitable critic might accuse me of insinuating that monstrous thought. On the contrary, one of its strengths of the fact that 'humans are practical rational animals' is a generic is that it blocks this kind of monstrous thought. For there are many people who are fully human by nature without being fully human by actualization \'97 people  who are in a coma, merely young, who have suffered a debilitating brain injury, or who have severe mental illness, and so. These are still human because they share the life form of humanity. Young humans are fully human \'97 their youth and diminutive size is no tragedy for every organism begins its life young and matures. Injured and ill humans are fully human by nature; the tragedy of injury and illness is that such cannot fully participate in their own life form; they cannot engage in characteristic activities. We must be able to capture the thought that the mentally ill or the genetic defect sufferer is abnormal, and that children are undeveloped or  immature, without slipping into the monstrous thought that they are not *human*. If people in comas, or the mentally ill, the genetically defective, are not even human then it would seem to be permissible to do all sorts of inhumanities. Robert P. George makes this point well:\
\
>Various criteria for where the line should be drawn [between living things it is permissible to use and those it is not permissible to use] have been proposed: sentience, consciousness, self-awareness, rationality, or being a moral agent (the last two come to the same thing). We will argue that the criterion is: having a rational nature, that is, having the natural capacity to reason and make free choices, a capacity it ordinarily takes months, or even years, to actualize, and which various impediments might prevent from being brought to full actualization, at least in this life. Thus, every human being has full moral worth or dignity, for every human being possesses such a rational nature.[@schulman2008human chapter 16, "The Nature and Basis of Human Dignity"]\
\
 The point of the argument above was that generic truths about humans do not inform us about what is universally distributed nor even what is statistically common but  about the life form of the species.  \
}