{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
Julia Annas says of virtue ethics that it is \'93
\f1\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
not by definition naturalistic. It would surely be surprising if it were; most ethical theories are compatible with different positions about their relation to the world. I take it that any ethics based on virtue requires an account of the good life which the virtues enable us to achieve.
\fs16 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up8 1 
\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\up0 On this issue of the good life most modern forms of virtue ethics are naturalistic, and often take a form called neo-Aristotelian, harking back to the best-known naturalistic theory from antiquity, Aristotle\'92s. When we are investigating what the good life is, these theories hold, and how living virtuously might achieve it, we are aided by investigating our human nature. This in turn we do by seeing how we humans are a part, though a distinctive part, of the world that the sciences tell us about.\'94 (Julia Annas, \'93Virtue Ethics: what kind of naturalism?\'94 
\i\fs22 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Virtue Ethics, Old and New, 
\i0 edited by Stephen M. Gardiner. Cornell, 1996. 
\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
The alternatives are metaphysical or religious virtue ethics and non-naturalistic virtue ethics. She calls the first one a \'93perfectly possible form\'94 but does not discuss it further. She calls the second \'93more radical\'94 and argues that we should not be \'93tempted\'94 to it. The reason is that it treats humans as non-continuous with nature. \
\
Developing Foot\'92s ideas about natural normativity, she says this:\
\'93What is so helpful for ethics from this kind of biological naturalism is that we find that the normativity of our ethical discourse is not something which emerges mysteriously with humans and can only be projected back, in an anthropomorphic way, onto trees and their roots. Rather, we find normativity in the realm of living things, plants and animals, already. It is part of the great merit of the work of Philippa Foot and Rosalind Hursthouse to have stressed this point. Like many important philosophical points, it is obvious once pointed out, but was rendered invisible for many decades by the ascendancy of non-naturalistic theories of ethical discourse. (Once we appreciate it, we can understand why those theories have been so barren of insight.)\'94 \
\
In this section, I aim to explore a theistic virtue ethics. I have been at pains to specify that \'93theistic\'94 does 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
not mean non-naturalistic. }