{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green23\blue24;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Our specifically and uniquely human lifeform is the basis of evaluations of individual humans that is both ethical and naturalistic. Ethical, because we are evaluating how well a person is living up to the standard \'97 how well he is living \'97 and naturalistic because the evaluation compares descriptions of how a person 
\i is living in fact 
\i0 with descriptions of how 
\i humans live in fact. 
\i0 Of course the second deployment of the locution \'93in fact\'94 refers to a normative fact, not a descriptive one. \
Stephen Brown captures this worry that humans as a whole are discontinuous with nature. 
\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\fs32 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93So it seems, pace naturalism, that human beings are not merely different in degree from other species of living thing but other in kind. This otherness, it would seem, might be so great as to render the explanatory-evaluative structure of naturalized virtue ethics impotent when referring to human beings qua human beings. Thus, there is no identity of structure between our evaluations of plants and animals qua creatures of their kind and our evaluations of human beings qua human beings.\'94 (Brown, \'93Really Naturalizing Virtue\'94, 4). \
He also says:\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\li720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f1\fs24 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\{\\Scrv_ps=
\f0\fs32 The charge that human variability entails there is no human lifeform not only flies in the face of the empirical evidence but also violates a central tenet of naturalism: the continuity of nature. In fact, Hursthouse concedes far too much to the critic. Our pride might erroneously dictate to our ego that we are far different from other species of animal, just as our pride once convinced us that we are other in kind from nonhuman animals. Naturalism rejects this assumption, and rightly so. It is a bit much to say that, compared to other animals, \'93the variation in us is of quite a different order\'94\'97except, perhaps, when it comes to setting our own ends (an issue I address below in \'a75). Moreover, Hursthouse herself agrees with what she calls the \'93standard first premise of naturalism\'94: that human beings are animals and thus \'93have a particular biological make-up and a natural life cycle\'94 (Hursthouse 1999: 206; cf. Romanell 1958). Life evolved from common ancestors. There is no radical break in the chain. The plain fact of human variability does not entail that there is no human lifeform. There is a human lifeform, albeit one that is more multiform in its expression than that of other animals. The mere fact of our versatility does not entail the theoretical inadequacy of naturalized virtue ethics. 
\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\pardirnatural

\f1 \cf0 \\end_Scrv_ps\}
\f0 \
(Brown 2005: }