{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Tahoma;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red52\green52\blue52;\red225\green223\blue209;\red34\green34\blue34;
\red230\green255\blue79;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red52\green52\blue52;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Adams, a Theory of Virtue, 2006\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300

\f1\b\fs20 \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
ABSTRACT\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl380\sa300

\f2\b0\fs26 \cf0 This book offers a systematic, comprehensive framework for thinking about the moral evaluation of character. Many recent attempts to stake out a place in moral philosophy for this concern define virtue in terms of its benefits for the virtuous person or for human society more generally. Part One of this book presents and defends a conception of virtue as intrinsic excellence of character, worth prizing for its own sake and not only for its benefits. The other two parts address two challenges to the ancient idea of excellence of character. One challenge arises from the importance of altruism in modern ethical thought, and the question of what altruism has to do with intrinsic excellence. Part Two argues that altruistic benevolence has indeed a crucial place in excellence of character, but that moral virtue should also be expected to involve excellence in being for other goods besides the well-being (and the rights) of other persons. It explores relations among cultural goods, personal relationships, one's own good, and the good of others, as objects of excellent motives. The other challenge is typified by doubts about the reality of moral virtue, arising from experiments and conclusions in social psychology. Part Three of the book explores in detail the prospects for an empirically realistic conception of excellence of character as an object of moral aspiration, endeavour, and education. It argues that such a conception will involve renunciation of the ancient thesis of the unity or mutual implication of all virtues, and acknowledgement of sufficient \'91moral luck\'92 in the development of any individual's character to make virtue very largely a gift, rather than an individual achievement, though nonetheless excellent and admirable for that.\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\sa300

\f1\fs22 \cf0 \cb3 Keywords: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.universitypressscholarship.com/search?f_0=keywords&q_0=character"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 character}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.universitypressscholarship.com/search?f_0=keywords&q_0=moral%20luck"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 moral luck}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.universitypressscholarship.com/search?f_0=keywords&q_0=altruism"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 altruism}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.universitypressscholarship.com/search?f_0=keywords&q_0=goods"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 goods}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.universitypressscholarship.com/search?f_0=keywords&q_0=unity%20of%20virtues"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 unity of virtues}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.universitypressscholarship.com/search?f_0=keywords&q_0=virtues"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 virtues}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.universitypressscholarship.com/search?f_0=keywords&q_0=well-being"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 well-being}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.universitypressscholarship.com/search?f_0=keywords&q_0=excellence"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 excellence}}\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\f3 \cf4 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Robert Merrihew Adams\
*A Theory of Virtue*\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl342\slmult1\sa220
\ls1\ilvl0
\f2\fs20 \cf4 Chapter 4: \
>The principal current alternative to defining virtue in terms of its intrinsic excellence is defining it in terms of its benefits. This chapter argues that a trait's being generally beneficial is not sufficient for it to be a virtue, and that its being more beneficial than any alternative may not even be necessary for a trait to be a virtue. In response to the question whether virtue \'91pays\'92, reliably benefiting its possessor, it is suggested that virtue may offer a great benefit that is inseparable from having a strong motive for conscientious and generous action.\
This gives the lie to any ethical naturalism that defines flourishing as a kind of good in itself and virtues as contributing to that flourishing. Virtues themselves are intrinsic excellences.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl342\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0\cf4 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\fs24 \cf4 \cb5 From Ben Bradley\'92s review on Notre Dame. {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://ndpr.nd.edu/news/25302-a-theory-of-virtue-excellence-in-being-for-the-good/"}}{\fldrslt https://ndpr.nd.edu/news/25302-a-theory-of-virtue-excellence-in-being-for-the-good/}}\
\
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The centerpiece of Adams's book, naturally, is his theory of virtue, according to which virtue is excellence in being for the good.\'a0 To "be for" the good is to be disposed to favor it in "action, desire, emotion or feeling" (p. 17).\'a0 Adams is a pluralist about the good; the goods that virtue is for include members of several ontological categories, including states of affairs, people, and beautiful objects (p. 22).\'a0 Since one can be for the good for the wrong reasons, virtue requires excellence in being for the good.\'a0 For example, one who pursues the good for selfish reasons fails to exemplify excellence in being for the good (p. 23), even if that selfishness leads to good results.\'a0 An excellence is intrinsically good, not merely instrumentally good; it is "worthy to be honored, loved, admired, or (in the extreme case) worshiped, for its own sake" (p. 24).\'a0 Adams is unambitious about providing guidance about what counts as an excellence; he says his view "does not provide an algorithm for virtue" (p. 26).\'a0 Judgments of excellence "must rely to a considerable extent on moral perceptiveness" and are "to some extent intuitionistic" (p. 26).\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0\cf4 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Adams's view is similar to the view put forward by Thomas Hurka in Virtue, Vice and Value.\'a0 Hurka claims that virtues are intrinsically good attitudes towards intrinsic goods.\'a0 The primary way in which Hurka's view differs from Adams's is that according to Hurka, how virtuous it is to love a particular good depends on the match between the degree of love and the degree of goodness.\'a0 If one good is better than the other, the virtuous person loves it more.\'a0 Call this the proportionality thesis.\'a0 Adams's view is, essentially, Hurka's view with the proportionality thesis removed.\
\
Can the virtues be unified or are they simply a list? \
	Adams says, No. They are a list of excellences, not unified in a single theory. \
	Slots makes a list of intrinsic goods: pleasure, knowledge, achievement \'97 and defines virtue by appeal to attitudes to those goods (p.30 of Adams 2006). \
\
\'93His discussion of the relevance of situationist psychology to moral theory is thorough and convincing.\'a0 For these reasons, and because of the wide range of topics covered, reading Adams's book would be an excellent way for anyone to get up to speed on the current state of virtue theory.\'a0 It would make an outstanding text for a graduate seminar on virtue.\'94 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl380

\f2\fs26 \cf6 \cb7 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec6 Two reasons to think that the classical conception of virtue ethics is "untouched" by the situationist challenge. "In the first place, the classical conception envisaged in this response does not suppose that true virtue is common enough to leave a statistically significant footprint in social psychologists' studies. It views virtue as an integrated condition by which one reliably responds appropriately to all sorts of situation. Without that integrated condition morally desirable dispositions are not counted as virtues. If virtue so conceived is rare, that is hardly surprising and does not show that virtue is not an ideal to which we should aspire. And, in the second place, the question whether anyone has such a comprehensive disposition to respond 
\i appropriately
\i0  is heavily laden with evaluation. The evaluation will be controversial at some points, and is not likely to be convincingly operationalized in the sorts of behavioral test used by social psychologists."[@adams2001virtue 118-19]\
\
\
"Situationist claims of the explanatory unimportance or non\uc0\u8208 existence of traits of personality or character generally seem to presuppose a direct disposition conception of traits. How do Ross and Nisbett, for instance, understand the \'93traditional personality traits\'94 that they suggest may not capture very well such consistencies as are found in persons' behavior? They equate them with \'93enduring predispositions to be friendly, dependent, aggressive, or the like.\'94 Harman says that character traits \'93are relatively long\u8208 term stable dispositions to act in distinctive ways. An honest person is disposed to act honestly. A kind person is disposed to act kindly.\'94{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.oxfordscholarship.com.ezproxy.uky.edu/view/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199207510.001.0001/acprof-9780199207510-chapter-8#acprof-9780199207510-note-156"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs22 \cf8 \super \strokec8 17}} I take John Doris's book, 
\i Lack of Character
\i0 , published in 2002, to be the fullest and most balanced current philosophical presentation of situationism. It presents a similar though slightly more nuanced conception of traits. Doris says that \'93to attribute a character or personality trait is to say, among other things, that someone is disposed to behave in a certain way in certain eliciting conditions.\'94{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.oxfordscholarship.com.ezproxy.uky.edu/view/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199207510.001.0001/acprof-9780199207510-chapter-8#acprof-9780199207510-note-157"}}{\fldrslt 
\fs22 \cf8 \super \strokec8 18}} Despite the qualification, \'93among other things,\'94 Doris seems to me to have little to say about the \'93other things,\'94 focusing overwhelmingly on behavioral dispositions." \
\
The problem with this view is that (a) it does not take into account motives.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl380
\cf6 "Conceptually simple, straightforwardly behavioral tests can in principle give strong evidence of the absence of some virtues." (121)\
\
At best, the experimental studies cited in the situationist challenge literature challenge our conceptions of "reactive" virtues. They say nothing of "proactive" virtues. That is to say, these studies limit their focus to a particular trait (such as honesty) in part by putting the sample population into a situation where there are virtually only two available courses of action \'97 the honest and the dishonest course. A necessary feature of any experimental study is that it be limited in scope. Not only are the costs of doing large-scale studies exponential, smaller-scale studies isolate variables. But it would be much more difficult, if not impossible, to construct a study in which the sample population has the opportunity to think ahead and choose their course from thousands of potential paths. The kind of behavior I am imagining is not elicited from a specific situation, so we might call it a "self-elicited" behavior. The kind of behavior I am imagining is one in which a person, unprompted and unbidden, initiates a project using the resources presently available. A child in a room with a certain amount of toys, and given no direction from the experimenters, might "self-elicit" play. But an adult in a room with a certain amount of toys will initiate any number of behaviors; they might take a nap, or they might introspect, or begin composing a poem, or do push-ups and jumping jacks, or sing a song stuck in their head, or remember the recent loss of a loved one and weep. But each of these behaviors aims at a different goal, some long-term and others more immediate. \
\
}