{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red20\green20\blue20;\red24\green147\blue14;\red15\green52\blue169;
\red67\green67\blue67;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl380

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
What comes naturally? The metaethical foundations of virtue ethics, Allison Postal\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
12. Teleology or Deontology?\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf2 The received view is that Kant's moral philosophy is a deontological normative theory at least to this extent: it denies that right and wrong are in some way or other functions of goodness or badness. It denies, in other words, the central claim of teleological moral views. For instance, act consequentialism is one sort of teleological theory. It asserts that the right action is that action of all the alternatives available to the agent that has the best overall outcome. Here, the goodness of the outcome determines the rightness of an action. Another sort of teleological theory might focus instead on character traits. 'Virtue ethics' asserts that a right action in any given circumstance is that action a virtuous person does or would perform in those circumstances. In this case, it is the goodness of the character of the person who does or would perform it that determines the rightness of an action. In both cases, as it were, the source or ground of rightness is goodness. And Kant's own views have typically been classified as deontological precisely because they have seemed to reverse this priority and deny just what such theories assert. Rightness, on the standard reading of Kant, is not grounded in the value of outcomes or character.\
There are several reasons why readers have thought that Kant denies the teleological thesis. First, he makes a plethora of statements about outcomes and character traits that appear to imply an outright rejection of both forms of teleology. For instance, in 
\i Groundwork
\i0  I, he says that he takes himself to have argued that \'93the objectives we may have in acting, and also our actions' effects considered as ends and what motivates our volition, can give to actions no unconditional or moral worth\'85[this] can be found nowhere but in the principle of the will, irrespective of the ends that can be brought about by such action\'94 (4: 400). This appears to say that moral rightness is not a function of the value of intended or actual outcomes. Kant subsequently says that a categorical imperative \'93declares an action to be objectively necessary of itself without reference to any purpose\'97that is, even without any further end\'94 (4:415). A categorical imperative \'93commands a certain line of conduct directly, without assuming or being conditional on any further goal to be reached by that conduct\'94 (4:416). These certainly appear to be the words of someone who rejects the idea that what makes actions right is primarily their relationship to what good may come of those actions, someone who rejects outright the act consequentialist form of teleology. Moreover, Kant begins the 
\i Groundwork
\i0  by noting that character traits such as the traditional virtues of courage, resolution, moderation, self-control, or a sympathetic cast of mind possess no unconditional, moral worth, (4:393-94, 398-99). If the moral rightness of an action is grounded in the value of the character traits of the person who performs or would perform it, then it seems Kant thinks that it would be grounded in something of only conditional value. This certainly would not comport well with the virtue ethics form of teleology.\
Second, there are, deeper theoretical claims and arguments of Kant's in both the 
\i Groundwork
\i0  and in the second 
\i Critique
\i0  that appear to be incompatible with any sort of teleological form of ethics. These claims and arguments all stem from Kant's insistence that morality is grounded in the autonomy of a rational will. For instance, Kant states that \'93if the will seeks the law that is to determine it anywhere else than in the fitness of its maxims for its own giving of universal law\'85heteronomy always results\'94 (4:441) If the law determining right and wrong is grounded in either the value of outcomes or the value of the character of the agent, it seems it will not be found in the fitness of the action's maxim to be a universal law laid down by the agent's own rational will. And Kant's most complete treatment of value, the second 
\i Critique's
\i0  \'93On the Concept of an Object of Pure Practical Reason\'94, appears to be a relentless attack on any sort of teleological moral theory. \'93The concept of good and evil\'94 he states, \'93must not be determined before the moral law (for which, as it would seem, this concept would have to be made the basis) but only (as was done here) after it and by means of it\'94 (5:63).\
A number of Kant's readers have come to question this received view, however. Perhaps the first philosopher to suggest a teleological reading was John Stuart Mill. In the first chapter of his 
\i Utilitarianism
\i0 , Mill implies that the Universal Law formulation of the Categorical Imperative could only sensibly be interpreted as a test of the consequences of universal adoption of a maxim. Several 20th century theorists have followed Mill's suggestion, most notably, R. M. Hare. Hare argued that moral judgments such as \'93Stealing is wrong\'94 are in fact universal prescriptions (\'93No stealing anywhere by anyone!\'94) And because they are universal, Hare argued, they forbid making exceptions. That in turn requires moral judgments to give each person's wellbeing, including our own, equal weight. And when we give each person's wellbeing equal weight, we are acting to produce the best overall outcome. Thus, in his view, the CI is \'93simply utilitarianism put into other words\'94 (Hare, 1993, p. 103). More recently, David Cummiskey (Cummiskey, 1996) has argued that Kant's view that moral principles are justified because they are universalizable is compatible with those principle themselves being consequentialist. Indeed, Cummiskey argues that they must be: respect for the value of Humanity entails treating the interests of each as counting for one and one only, and hence for always acting to produce the best overall outcome.\
There are also teleological readings of Kant's ethics that are non-consequentialist. Barbara Herman has urged philosophers to \'93leave deontology behind\'94 as an understanding of Kant's moral theory on the grounds that the conception of practical reason grounding the Categorical Imperative is itself a conception of value. Herman's idea is that Kant never meant to say that no value grounds moral principles. That, she argues, would imply that there would be no reason to conform to them. Instead, Kant thought the principles of rationality taken together constitute rational agency, and rational agency so constituted itself functions as a value that justifies moral action. (1993, 231) Herman's proposal thus has Kant's view grounding the rightness of actions in rational agency, and then in turn offering rational agency itself up as a value. Both Paul Guyer and Allen Wood have offered proposals that differ from Herman's in content, but agree on the general form of teleology that she defends as a reading of Kant. Guyer argues that autonomy itself is the value grounding moral requirements. Moral thinking consists in recognizing the priceless value of a rational agent's autonomous will, something in light of whose value it is necessary for any rational agent to modify his behavior (1998, 22-35). And Wood argues that humanity itself is the grounding value for Kant. While the second 
\i Critique
\i0  claims that good things owe their value to being the objects of the choices of rational agents, they could not, in his view, acquire any value at all if the source of that value, rational agency, itself had no value. (1999, 130; see also pp. 157-8) Finally, Rae Langton has recently argued that if Kant's theory is to be thought of as an objectivistic view, we must suppose that the value of humanity and the good will are independent of simply being the objects of our rational choices. If their value thereby becomes the source of the rightness of our actions \'97 say, our actions are right if and because they treat that self-standing value in various ways \'97 then her reading too is teleological.\
It is of considerable interest to those who follow Kant to determine which reading \'97 teleological or deontological \'97 was actually Kant's, as well as which view ought to have been his. A powerful argument for the teleological reading is the motivation for Herman's proposal: What rationale can we provide for doing our duty at all if we don't appeal to it's being good to do it? But a powerful argument for the deontological reading is Kant's own apparent insistence that the authority of moral demands must come simply from their being the demands of each person's own rational will, quite apart from the value that will may have. (see Schneewind, 1996, Johnson, 2007, 2008, also Reath, 1994) On the latter view, moral demands gain their authority simply because you yourself have, insofar as you are rational, willed them. Proponents of this reading are left with the burden of answering Herman's challenge to provide a rationale for having willed it. On the former view, by contrast, a rationale is at hand: because your will is, insofar as it is rational, good. Proponents of this former reading are then left with the burden of explaining how it could be the autonomy of the will alone that explains the authority of morality.\
\
\
Ahlstrom, Epistemic Value\
Coup, Critique of Shafer-Landau\
\
\
Ahlstrom, Kristoffer, Moderate Epistemic Expressivism\
\
Russon, John.  \'93Aristotle\'92s Animative Epistemology\'94 in Idealistic Studies. \
\
Brown, Stephen. Really Naturalizing Virtue, Ethic@, v. 4, n.1, p. 7-22, Jun 2005. \
\
Hempel, Carl G. Aspects of Scientific Explanation, The Free Press, 1965. \
\
Jacobs, Nathan. \'93On the Metaphysics of God and Creatures in the Eastern Pro-Nicenes\'94\
\
Gert, Joshua. \'93Problems for Moral Twin Earth Arguments\'94, Synthese, Vol. 150, No. 2 (2006), pp. 171-183. \
\
Joyce, Richard. \'93What neuroscience can (and cannot) contribute to metaethics\'94 in Moral Psychology Volume 3: The Neuroscience of Morality: Emotion, Brain Disorders, and Development W. Sinnott-Armstrong (ed.). MIT, 2008. \
\
MacIntyre, Alasdair. Dependent Rational Animals: Why Human Beings Need the Virtues. Open Court, 1999. \
\
Mend ham, Matthew. \'93Kant and the \'91Distinctively Moral Ought\'92: A Platonic-Augustinian Defense, Against MacIntyre\'94, Journal of Religion, Vol. 87, No. 4 (2007), pp.556-591. \
\
Finlay, Stephen. \'93Four Faces of Moral Realism\'94, Philosophy Compass 2, 2007. \
\
Morgan, Seiriol. "Naturalism and Normativity."Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 72, no. 2 (2006): 319-344.\
\
Wielenberg, Erik J. "On the Evolutionary Debunking of Morality*." Ethics 120, no. 3 (2010): 441-464.\
\
Wielenberg, E. (2010). \
\
Arnhart, Larry. "The new Darwinian naturalism in political theory." American Political Science Review 89, no. 02 (1995): 389-400.\
\
Vogler, Candace. "Modern moral philosophy again: Isolating the promulgation problem." In Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, vol. 106, pp. 345-362. Aristotelian Society, 2006.\
\
Vogler, C. (2006). Modern moral philosophy again: Isolating the promulgation problem. In Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society (Vol. 106, pp. 345-362). Aristotelian Society.\
\
Huneman, Philippe. "Naturalising purpose: From comparative anatomy to the \'91adventure of reason\'92." Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 37, no. 4 (2006): 649-674.\
\
Poole, Randall Allen. "The neo-idealist reception of kant in the Moscow Psychological Society." Journal of the History of Ideas 60, no. 2 (1999): 319-343.\
\
Railton, Peter. "Aesthetic value, moral value, and the ambitions of naturalism."Aesthetics and ethics: Essays at the intersection (1998): 59-105.\
\
Scanlon, Thomas M. Being realistic about reasons. Oxford University Press, 2014.\
\
Simpson, Peter, and Sine Quibus Non. "Goodness and nature." Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff (1987).\
\
Jenkins, John. Is \
Hacker\uc0\u8208 Wright, John. "What is natural about foot's ethical naturalism?." Ratio22, no. 3 (2009): 308-321.\
\
Thompson, Michael. What is it to Wrong Someone?: A Puzzle about Justice. Faculty of Law, University of Toronto, 2003.\
\
\
\
Horgan, Terence. "From supervenience to superdupervenience: Meeting the demands of a material world." Mind (1993): 555-586.\
\
\
\
FIND AND READ\
\
Odenbaugh, Jay. "Nothing in ethics makes sense except in the light of evolution? Natural goodness, normativity, and naturalism." Synthese (2015): 1-25.\
\
\
\
Barham, James Alan. "Teleological Realism in Biology." PhD diss., University of Notre Dame, 2011.\
\
Lott, Micah. "Why be a good Human Being? Natural Goodness, Reason, and the Authority of Human Nature." Philosophia 42, no. 3 (2014): 761-777.\
\
The central claim of Aristotelian naturalism is that moral goodness is a kind of species-specific natural goodness. Aristotelian naturalism has recently enjoyed a resurgence in the work of philosophers such as Philippa Foot, Rosalind Hursthouse, and Michael Thompson. However, any view that takes moral goodness to be a type of natural goodness faces a challenge: Granting that moral goodness is natural goodness for human beings, why should we care about being good human beings? Given that we are rational creatures who can \'91step back\'92 from our nature, why should we see human nature as authoritative for us? This is the authority-of-nature challenge. In this essay, I state this challenge clearly, identify its deep motivation, and distinguish it from other criticisms of Aristotelian naturalism. I also articulate what I consider the best response, which I term the practical reason response. This response, however, exposes Aristotelian naturalism to a new criticism \'96 that it has abandoned the naturalist claim that moral goodness is species-specific natural goodness. Thus, I argue, Aristotelian naturalists appear to face a dilemma: Either they cannot answer the authority-of-nature challenge, or in meeting the challenge they must abandon naturalism. Aristotelian naturalists might overcome this dilemma, but doing so is harder than some Aristotelians have supposed. In the final sections of the paper, I examine the difficulties in overcoming the dilemma, and I suggest ways that Aristotelians might answer the authority-of-nature challenge while preserving naturalism.\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
For more recent treatments of Aristotle's teleology, see Nussbaum (1978); Sorabji (1980); Baime (1980); and, most of all, Gotthelf (1976).\
\
 \
\
Barham 2011 \'97 Teleological Realism in Biology\
\
More specifically, I will be exploring the idea that teleological discourse, both in everyday life and in biological science, is best understood as describing real, objectively existing properties of biological systems, quite apart from human interests and conceptual schemes. This means the claim that\'97assuming a broadly realistic stance towards the objects of everyday and biological discourse\'97teleological phenomena should be viewed as being on an ontological par with such well-known biological phenomena as 1 On this distinction, see Lennox (1992). 2 locomotion, phagocytosis, photosynthesis, and the like. I will refer to this basic claim as \'93teleological realism in biology\'94 (TRB, for short).\
\
 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf2 Neo-Aristotelian Ethical Naturalism\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf2 \

\i Rosalind Hursthouse\

\i0 The proponents of neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism (henceforth \'93Aristotelian naturalism\'94 for short) include\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf2 Geach (1956, 1977), \
Anscombe because her work has influenced so many others. (Gaut [1997, 2002] should also be known as a significant contributor.) \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf2 \
Foot (2001), \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf2 Hursthouse (1999), \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf2 McDowell (1995), \
MacIntyre (1999), \
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf2 Nussbaum (1993, 1995), and \
Thompson (1995); and also \
\
Brown, Adams,  \
\
Their views are so unlike those of other proponents of ethical naturalism (see Naturalism, Ethical), and they occupy such an unfamiliar position in philosophy, that they are simultaneously criticized on at least two quite different bases. Some say they are not trying to offer naturalism at all, because they avowedly employ a moralized conception of human nature; some say they are trying to offer naturalism insofar as they offer a biological foundation for ethics, but that either this has counterintuitive upshots or the biology is Aristotle's and thereby pre-Darwinian and not a proper naturalistic foundation at all.\
\
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b \cf2 Neo-Aristotelian Naturalism and the Indeterminacy Objection\
\pard\pardeftab720

\b0 \cf2 \
Philippa Foot\'92s virtue ethics remains an intriguing but divisive position in normative ethics. For some, the promise of grounding human virtue in natural facts is a useful method of establishing normative content. For others, the natural facts on which the virtues are established appear naively uninformed when it comes to the empirical details of our species. In response to this criticism, a new cohort of neo-Aristotelians like John Hacker-Wright attempt to defend Foot by reminding critics that the facts at stake are not claimed to be explanatory descriptions of the kind provided by empirical science. Instead, they are derived from a logical form that is presupposed when we categorize something as a living organism. Neo-Aristotelian naturalism is therefore said to be immune to the empirical defeaters put forward as criticism of the theory. I argue that neo-Aristotelians like Hacker-Wright can only rescue Foot\'92s naturalism from being uninformed by exposing it to an indeterminacy objection: if claims about human virtue are grounded in facts about our species other than those derived from science, then the position becomes immune to empirical defeaters at the cost of being unable to generate informative normative content.\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://philpapers.org/go.pl?id=GOWVAN&proxyId=&u=http%3A%2F%2Forigin.web.fordham.edu%2Fimages%2Fundergraduate%2Fpsychology%2Ffisher%2Fvirtue%2520and%2520nature.pdf"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 Virtue and nature}}\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl260
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://philpapers.org/s/Christopher%20W.%20Gowans"}}{\fldrslt 
\b \cf4 Christopher W. Gowans}}
\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://philpapers.org/asearch.pl?pub=1019"}}{\fldrslt 
\i\b0 \cf4 Social Philosophy and Policy}}
\b0  25 (1):28-55 (2008)\

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trmaxw24000 \tamart200 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1040\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr400 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth9360\clftsWidth3 \clmaxw20000 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb200 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl420
\cf5 Abstract\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl420
\cf0 The Neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism of Philippa Foot and Rosalind Hursthouse purports to establish a naturalistic criterion for the virtues. Specifically, by developing a parallel between the natural ends of nonhuman animals and the natural ends of human beings, they argue that character traits are justified as virtues by the extent to which they promote and do not inhibit natural ends such as self-preservation, reproduction, and the well-being of one\'92s social group. I argue that the approach of Foot and Hursthouse cannot provide a basis for moral universalism, the widely-accepted idea that each human being has moral worth and thus deserves significant moral consideration. Foot and Hursthouse both depict a virtuous agent as implicitly acting in accord with moral universalism. However, with respect to charity, a virtue they both emphasize, their naturalistic criterion (especially in the more elaborate form developed by Hursthouse) at best provides a warrant for a restricted form of charity that extends only to a limited number of persons. There is nothing in the natural ends of human beings, as Foot and Hursthouse understand these, that gives us a reason for having any concern for the well-being of human beings as such\
\
\
Beg and Davis, Alignment of Ethical Naturalism and Neo-Kantian Non-Naturalism\
\
\cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720

\b\fs32 \cf4 Neo-Aristotelian Attempts to Bind Morality to Human Nature\
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://philpapers.org/s/Daniel%20Hirst"}}{\fldrslt Daniel Hirst}}\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://philpapers.org/asearch.pl?pub=3850"}}{\fldrslt 
\i\b0 \cf4 Emergent Australasian Philosophers}}
\b0  1 (1) (2008)\

\itap1\trowd \taflags0 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trcbpat1 \trmaxw24000 \tamart200 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1040\clftsWidth3 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb20 \clpadr400 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth14060\clftsWidth3 \clmaxw20000 \clmart10 \clmarl10 \clmarb10 \clmarr10 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrnil \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt20 \clpadl20 \clpadb200 \clpadr20 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl420

\fs28 \cf5 Abstract\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl420
\cf0 The purpose of this paper is to examine recent neo-Aristotelian attempts to tie morality to human nature. I look specifically at the work in this field conducted by Philippa Foot and Rosalind Hursthouse. In particular, I articulate their distinct use of the word \'91good\'92 , and how in making this move they illuminate what we are doing when we make ethical evaluations. I then look at two pieces written by Julia Annas and Bernard Williams which attempt to criticise the neo-Aristotelian project. I ultimately defend the neo-Aristotelian argument that moral activity is on par with self-interested behaviour in any evaluation of practical rationality\
\
\
\cell \lastrow\row
\pard\pardeftab720\sl320\sa240

\f1\b\fs24 \cf0 Bradshaw \'97\'a0
\b0 \
Be clear about metaphysical naturalism, hardcore naturalism, liberal naturalism, non-naturalism, supernaturalism \'97 in the dissertation proposal. For Anita\'92s sake.\'a0\
Naturalism the broader depabte \'a0\'97 is framed in terms from the scientific revelation. Nature is this autonomous realm of law. It runs on its own. Does it need a higher explanatory principle.\'a0\
For the Greeks, nature is already divine. Nature is one of the names Aristotle uses when he\'92s already talking about God.\'a0\
Aristotle is the paradigm. Someone who grounds ethics in human nature. They call all those views ethical naturalism. if it\'92s true that it\'92s all built around Aristotle. It doesn\'92t fit well the other use of the term, it doesn\'92t fit well with the post-scientific revolution use of the term. Within writing the N. Ethics.\'a0\
The last chapter of the Eudaimian Ethics is more striking. The ultimate criterion of what\'92s good is whether it brings you closer to God.\'a0\
Natural law = non-natuarlism about epistemology?\'a0\
Two kinds of thomihtic natural law. Natural = defined by human nature. Some good we naturally seek, share with animals good sleep reproduction bodily comfort.\'a0\
Some goods we naturally seek as rational beings, knowledge, society, knowledge of God. In that question, Bradshaw thinks, he\'92s very stoic in how he frames these things, it\'92s human nature that makes us naturally seek these things.\'a0\
So how do you adjudicate among them? He doesn\'92t say. Frustrating. Higher goods don\'92t always trump lower goods. You might starve if you seek knowledge.\'a0\
if you get into larger society these conflicts are rampant. Doesn\'92t give means of adjudicating. \'91\
The treatise on law is a small part \'97 the rest is on virtues\'a0\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl320
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Traditional Natural Law \'a0
\b0 Russel Hittinger (first things)\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl320\sa240
\cf0 Jay Buschemvsky\
Edward Feser (traditionalist)\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl320
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
New Natural Law
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl320\sa240
\cf0 John Finnis\
Robert George\
All began with Gemain Grisez, a theologian.\'a0\
They don\'92t want to have to talk about human nature\'85 that\'92s off-putting to moderns, too Aristotelianism, problematic in light of Darwinism. Instead they want to talk about the intrinsic requirements of practical [reason?].\'a0\
They say some things that are similar to that particular question in the Summa. But they don\'92t tie it to human reason. But they tie it to practical reason. 8 things: Health, physical well-being, social interaction, knowledge, religion\'85 pseudo-Kantian version of Aquinas? In that it emphasises practical reason. It seems rather more a priori than the traditional \'85 just reason. Rather than human nature.\'a0\
Is reason instrumental? Or platonic/aristotelian?\'a0\
The way these debates are framed in analytic ethics\'85 are historical naive. They have to operate within terms defend by Hume in the 1700s or whenever.\'a0\
---\
1. Realism and cognitivism -- Macintyre and shafer-landau chapter 2. Realism and semantic realism-\'a0\
3.Constructivism- Hursthouse and Shaffer chapter 3. \'a0Are virtues and purposes of human nature constructed by \'a0 humans collectively, individually, or by certain ideal humans or agents.\
4. Ethical naturalism v non-naturalism\
Smith . Schafer-landau 4 for non-naturalist realism ... Thomas Nagel, Adams? Not Timmons but Scanlon ?\'a0\
5.\'a0\
\uc0\u8232 \
Talbot Brewer: \'93Philosophical ethics is widely thought to consist in an inquiry into the nature, source, and content of moral reasons for action, including those overriding reasons we call duties or obligations. This putative class of reasons is often distinguished by contrast with reasons of self-interest.\'94 (Brewer 2009)\
\'93Philosophical ethics\'85 becomes self-formative activity in its own right\'85 it ceases to be \'93mere theory\'94 and becomes an intensified form of a vital life activity. If we think of ethical philosophy in this way, we gain further insight into the significance of the fact that as a field it makes so little progress. It is not the sort of activity that could yield findings that could be learned by future generations so as to spare them the trouble of engaging in the activity for themselves.\'94 (Brewer, The Retrieval of Ethics, 2009)\
\'93If philosophy is an intrinsically valuable and potentially focal activity rather than a communicable expertise, then perhaps we should not be greatly troubled by the field\'92s lack of progress, just as we are not greatly troubled by lack of progress in friendship or sex or art.\
Preoccupations for the health of the field might fruitfully be directed to the question whether the practice is surviving in a vital and uncorrupted form rather than to the question whether our mode of engagement is adding to a stock of settled findings or insights that can be handed to the next generation.\'94 (Brewer, The Retrieval of Ethics, 2009)\
}