{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 # Introduction #\
\
## Thesis  ##\
\
This dissertation defends four claims: It argues that (a) commonly accepted virtues of the mind and will (such as courage, justice, moderation, and practical wisdom, wisdom) are perfections of human nature in practice, that (b) such virtues are necessary for human beings as such \'97 i.e. the task of becoming  virtuous is *a categorical imperative,* a perfect duty, an unconditional obligation that also has the best consequences, makes the most people most happy; that (c) though not all people accurately described as \'91virtuous\'92 are accurately described as \'91happy\'92, only virtuous people are happy, and finally (d) a second-order claim about claims (a)-(c) that they are compatible with metaphysical naturalism correctly understood.  \
\
These are age-old themes. Treating them adequately is the task of a lifetime, not a single dissertation. "The measure of listening to such discussions is the whole of life."[@plato 
\i Republic 
\i0 450b.] Yet they are worthy themes. Even an inadequate treatment of a worthy theme may hope to attain some value. \
\
To render these themes more manageable, I limit my scope to the ethical writings of five contemporary "neo-Aristotelian" virtue theorists: Alasdair MacIntyre, Philippa Foot, John McDowell, Rosalind Hursthouse, and Robert M. Adams. Each chapter offers a treatment, however incomplete, of one of these thinkers. Each chapter elucidates key insights and defends what I take to be true in these insights.\
\
The first three claims are liable to be seen by some as platitudes. The fourth is perhaps still lively and controversial. Regardless, there are objections to all these claims. Just as importantly, there are objections to *the assumptions undergirding* such claims. The articulation and defense of these claims proceeds in a pattern not strictly linear. Each chapter is sensitive and responsive to a given thinker -- to his or her project and major claims, to the constructive arguments supporting those claims, and to the various local skirmishes that arise from particular critics. Even so, common themes emerge and this author's (perhaps idiosyncratic) commitments become clear as the dust settles. \
\
My goal is not in the end to uncover any fresh moral truths nor even to freshly demonstrate age-old platitudes. My strategy is essential conservative: to dismantle common prejudicial objections to the assumptions undergirding (a)-(c) and rendering it plausible to believe (a)-(c) if each objection can be either undercut or rebutted. \
\
The defense of these claims, therefore, takes the form of an exploration of virtue, practical reason, and happiness.  Though of course details are needed, I think it best to offer a very rough initial account of three key terms: *Virtues* are positive character qualities that are admirable, necessary for living well; *practical reason* is that rational faculty of reflective and intentional deliberation by which we construct and execute life plans; and *happiness* is quite simply a name for a person (or group) whose life is going well, who has good character and has a good life plan and is executing it more or less according to plan. \
\
The concepts of virtue, practical reason, and happiness are the primary focus of this research. But my focus will extend to include other key concepts that these philosophers invoke in their account of virtue. For instance, *practice* is a key secondary concept in MacIntyre because he defines virtues as \'93acquired human qualities that enable their possessor to achieve those goods which are internal to *practices*.\'94[@macintyre1984after, 191, emphasis added. *After Virtue* was published in 1981. Unless otherwise noted, the citations in this proposal refer to the 1984 second edition.]  To discuss MacIntyre's account of virtue it will be useful to discuss writings like that of Michael Thompson, who gives an account of life, action, and practice.[@thompson2008life] Another key secondary concept is that of a *human life-form*, because Philippa Foot argues that virtues are necessary for creatures like us. She says, \'93virtues play a necessary part in the life of human beings as do stings in the life of bees.\'94[@foot2001natural 35] To discuss her account of virtue it will be useful to discuss concept of what is \'93necessary for humans\'94 in the writings like that of Peter Geach. Similarly, the concept of *human nature* is key for Hursthouse, as is *second nature* for McDowell. \
\
For each writer, I shall remaining sensitive to their particular project, while keeping an eye on some or all of these thematic questions.  My primary governing questions are: how does each philosopher conceive of virtue? How does he or she defend that conception against the battery of objections from critics? And what can we cull from their accounts that is of value? }