{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 We have seen MacIntyre\'92s argument that a-teleological ethics is purposeless ethics. We have seen that much of modern moral theorizing is such purposeless ethics \'97 a set of abstract rules (supposed to satisfy the demands of universal duty) or a set of actions (supposed to be likely to cause the desired consequences) devoid of historical context and social content. And we have seen that the restoration of teleological virtues, in their social/traditional context, makes the whole *quest of life* intelligible, including the practical reason needed to live well and the moral virtues needed to avoid temptations to live poorly and to become fully human. These teleological virtues we grounded in human practice. \
We have seen with Foot that there may indeed be *biological* grounding for teleological virtue as well. As Aristotle observed, and as any present day observer can confirm for himself, there is a parity between the *the nature of living beings as they appear to us* and functional and semantic properties in our language (both words and grammar). If this is right, then the Great Platitudes that living virtuously is living a *fully human* life is vindicated. We are required by practical rationality, by our social nature, *and* by our biological nature to develop virtues like loyalty, promise-keeping, courage, and practical wisdom. Furthermore, we vindicated the presumption that a special sort of deep happiness (contrasted with pleasure) is the natural, intrinsic result of the excellence or perfection of our nature (social, psychological, biological, etc.). We contrasted Foot\'92s theory which McDowell critiqued as \'93empirical naturalism\'94  with Stephen Brown\'92s similar theory and argued that Brown more justly falls under that condemnation than Foot. \
The recurring theme of these explorations has been what the Great Platitudes say about human nature as creatures in the broader cosmos. We saw with John McDowell how the fear of \'93spooky\'94 metaphysics compels some to sharply distinguish human nature from nature as a whole; to transpose human \'93second nature\'94 or culture on the vast, interlocking matrix of space-time and energy that is the dominant image of Laplacian nature. But McDowell\'92s brand of neo-Kantian idealism promises more than it delivers. When pushed, the dichotomy between nature / human nature collapses under the pressure of the absolute or unrestricted conception of nature and a restricted conception. McDowell wants nature to be restricted, but the line restricting it leaves mysterious everything outside nature. When he wants it unrestricted, then he cannot exclude (except by definitional fiat!) the supernatural entities or properties he is spooked by. The upshot is that McDowell\'92s theorizing is vulnerable to being ransacked by an Aristotelian realist (like myself) who plunders the realism while discarding the physicalism, anti-realism, or idealism. McDowell\'92s objections to such a plundering can in-principle contain no adequate rejoinders. \
}