{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 # Happiness\
\
My aim is to discuss the human *telos*. I shall assume that Aristotle and Annas are right that happiness is a good enough name for that thing or set of things, whatever it is/they are, that constitute our *telos*. So this is a discussion of happiness.\
\
I would like to begin a discussion of happiness by distinguishing between two concepts: destiny and destination. \
\
Roughly, a destiny is an inevitable end. A destination is an *evitable* end; it is a *chosen* end. Destiny does not contain within it (at least not necessarily) any intentionality. An asteroid many light years away from the moon (let's say) has a destiny of hitting the moon in 180,000 years. It's trajectory, and the coincidental perfect timing of the absence of any intervening objects, makes contact inevitable. \
\
A destination is different. When I told my mother I was moving to Kentucky *to get a PhD in philosophy* I was not describing my inevitable destiny, but describing my chosen destination. Many intervening factors could prevent me (car trouble, illness, etc.) -- and what's more, many factors could *dissuade me* (lack of jobs, money trouble, etc.). \
\
Happiness is our human destination. It is not, sadly, our human destiny. \
\
There is no one factor that seems to capture our destiny except biologica  l death. The major candidates for our destiny are not universal: Health, reproduction, and survival. Not all living things are healthy, not all successfully reproduce, and in the end none survive. \
\
All living things *strive* for health, survival, reproduction and genetic propogation. But all living things, in the end, die. Individuals die when their metabolism stops, when if they have brains all brain functions stop, when they stop moving, and so on. Species "die" when they go extinct. \
\
Socrates is mortal. All men are mortal, and Socrates is man. But so are you and I "men" (the species, not the sex). So our destiny is biological death. \
\
What is our destination? Survival? The avoidance of death? Eternal life? Salvation? Evolution? Pleasure? "Permanent human happiness?"^[The Dalai Lama proposed this formulation.] Peace and nonviolence? Knowledge? The vision of God? Freedom from the wheel of reincarnation? Each of these guesses has something to commend it. \
\
1. The avoidance of death by medical science and/or evolution. This is the transhumanist project of Ray Kurzweil, Google's Calico, and Nick Bostrom. \
2. The avoidance of death by salvation from God as a free gift, or through faith or holiness or both. This is the Christian vision of \
3. The achievement of pleasure while life lasts. This is formalized despair. There is no happiness, therefore eat drink and be "happy" with scare quotes in bold. Our destiny is all we have, so we have no destination. Enjoy the journey until the journey dumps you into the trash compactor. \
4. The vision of God. This is the peculiarly Christian vision. \
5. Freedom from the wheel of reincarnation. \
\
One major distinction can be drawn between these various views along the question of how long human life lasts. Is human life (ideally) about 80 years, or more as medical science advances? Or is the human life countless millenia? This is a factual question that, of course, bears on the question of our telos. \
\
Is there any one conception of happiness that can coordinate these two views? If not, then no discussion of happiness can proceed before either proving or assuming an answer about the length of human life. \
\
Clearly, proving an answer to the satisfaction of all is a fool's errand. It is a  massive, contentious question. One can formulate it in terms of human personhood, the "immortality of the soul," and so on. Andrew Bailey's recent paper calls this the "persistance question": Do human animals have strictly biological persistence conditions?\
\
> Most contemporary animalists also say \'91yes\'92 to the persistence question. According to these animalists, a human animal lasts across an interval just in the case that its \'91purely animal functions \'96 metabolism, the capacity to breathe and circulate one\'92s blood, and the like \'96 continue' across that interval. We may, following Eric Olson, call this theory about the persistence of animals the \'91Biological Approach\'92.\
\
If so, what criteria would such a view have to satisfy? \
\
Given that human beings are rational animals that live either ~80 years or forever, what is our destination? The disjunction embedded in the question opens up a discouragingly wide range of possible answers. Nevertheless, let us try to answer it \
\
If there is any *one* thing that animals seek, it is determined by their nature. In my terms, their nature provides a "destiny". But our rational nature makes our way of life variable and hence pluralizes our destiny until death consolidates all those differences again. Hence if there is any *one* thing that rational animals seek, it is determined by the nature of rationality itself. Clearly, different people and cultures vary in believing and valuing particular objects. But variance is compatible with a single *telos* or single *plurality* of teloi. \
\
Variance is compatible with error. \
\
Is there anything rationality seeks by nature? Knowledge. What about practical rationality? Goodness. That is, knowing things *is what reason does*, and pursuing good things *is what practical reason does*; reason also avoid false things, and practical reason avoids evil. \
\
Happiness, the destination of every human being, is to know truth and to attain as much goodness as possible -- whether in the span of 80-90 years (barring illness, injury, and ) until biological death or for the rest of time. \
\
That this is our telos is possible to know even without knowing whether, in fact, our existence persists beyond biological death. \
\
}