{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}}
\deftab720
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl320
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## Bibliography of Works Cited  (2/8/16)\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl320
\ls2\ilvl0
\f1 \cf0 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Adams, E. M. 
\i Ethical Naturalism and the Modern World-View
\i0 . Praeger, 1973.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl320
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Adams, Robert M. 
\i A Theory of Virtue: Excellence in Being for the Good
\i0 . Clarendon Press, 2006.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93A Theory of Virtue: Response to Critics.\'94 
\i Philosophical Studies
\i0  148, no. 1 (2010): 159\'9665.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	4.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Finite and Infinite Goods: A Framework for Ethics
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2002.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	5.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Ahlstrom-Vij, Kristoffer. \'93In Defense of Veritistic Value Monism.\'94 
\i Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
\i0  94, no. 1 (2013): 19\'9640.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	6.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Moderate Epistemic Expressivism.\'94 
\i Philosophical Studies
\i0  163, no. 2 (2013): 337\'9657.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	7.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Alfano, Mark. 
\i Current Controversies in Virtue Theory
\i0 . Edited by Mark Alfano. Routledge, 2015.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	8.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. , ed. \'93Current Controversies in Virtue Theory.\'94 Routledge, 2015.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	9.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Angner, Erik. \'93Is Empirical Research Relevant to Philosophical Conclusions?\'94 
\i Res Philosophica
\i0  90, no. 3 (2013): 365\'9685.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	10.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Annas, Julia. \'93Being Virtuous and Doing the Right Thing.\'94 In 
\i Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association
\i0 , 61\'9675, 2004.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	11.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Intelligent Virtue
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2011.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	12.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Morality and Self Interest.\'94 edited by Paul Bloomfield, 205\'9621. Oxford University Press, 2009.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	13.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The Morality of Happiness
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 1993.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	14.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93The Oxford Handbook of Ethical Theory.\'94 edited by David Copp, 515\'9636. Oxford University Press, 2006.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	15.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Virtue Ethics, Old and New.\'94 edited by Stephen Gardiner. Cornell University Press, 2005.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	16.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Anscombe, G. E. M. 
\i Intention
\i0 . Harvard University Press, 1957.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	17.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Modern Moral Philosophy.\'94 
\i Philosophy
\i0  33, no. 124 (1958): 1\'9619.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	18.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Aquinas, Thomas. 
\i Summa Theologica
\i0 , 1200.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	19.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Aristotle. 
\i Nicomachean Ethics
\i0 . Princeton University Press, 2014.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	20.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Physics
\i0 . Princeton University Press, 2014.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	21.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Politics
\i0 . Princeton University Press, 2014.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	22.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Armstrong, John M. \'93After the Ascent: Plato on Becoming like God.\'94 
\i Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy
\i0  26 (2004): 171\'9683.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	23.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Arnhart, Larry. \'93Aristotle\'92s Biopolitics: A Defense of Biological Teleology against Biological Nihilism [with Commentries].\'94 
\i Politics and the Life Sciences
\i0  6, no. 2 (1988): pp. 173\'96229.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	24.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Arras, John. \'93Theory and Bioethics.\'94 In 
\i The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
\i0 , edited by Edward N. Zalta, 2013.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	25.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Athanasius, St. 
\i On the Incarnation
\i0 . St. Vladimir\'92s Seminary Press, 1998.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	26.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Athanassoulis, Nafsika. \'93A Response to Harman: Virtue Ethics and Character Traits.\'94 In 
\i Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
\i0 , 100:215\'9621, 2000.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	27.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Atkins, Margaret. \'93Morality without God?\'94 
\i The Heythrop Journal
\i0  46, no. 1 (2005): 65\'9671.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	28.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Audi, Robert. \'93Intuitionism, Pluralism, and the Foundations of Ethics.\'94 
\i Moral Knowledge
\i0 , 1996, 101\'9636.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	29.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The Good in the Right: A Theory of Intuition and Intrinsic Value
\i0 . Princeton University Press, 2009.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	30.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Ayer, A.J. \'93Foundations of Ethics.\'94 edited by Russ Shaffer-Landeau and Terence Cuneo. Blackwell, 2007.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	31.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Ayer, Alfred J. \'93Critique of Ethics and Theology.\'94 
\i Essays on Moral Realism
\i0 , 1988, 27\'9641.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	32.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Badhwar, Neera K. \'93The Limited Unity of Virtue.\'94 
\i Nous
\i0 , 1996, 306\'9629.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	33.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Bailey, Andrew M. \'93Animalism.\'94 
\i Philosophy Compass
\i0  10, no. 12 (2015): 867\'9683.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	34.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Balfour, Arthur J. 
\i Theism and Humanism
\i0 . Hodder & Stoughton, 1915.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	35.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Barham, James. \'93Teleological Realism in Biology.\'94 PhD dissertation, 2011.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	36.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Battaly, Heather. \'93A Pluralist Theory of Virtue.\'94 In 
\i Current Controversies in Virtue Theory
\i0 , edited by Mark Alfano. Routledge, 2015.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	37.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Beauchamp, Tom, and James Childress. 
\i Principles of Biomedical Ethics
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2001.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	38.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Bentham, Jeremy. 
\i Introduction to the Principles of Morality and Legislation
\i0 , n.d.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	39.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Bernstein, Richard. \'93Whatever Happened to Naturalism.\'94 
\i Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association
\i0  69, no. 2 (November 1995): 57\'9676.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	40.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Berry, Wendell. 
\i What Are People for?: Essays
\i0 . Counterpoint Press, 2010.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	41.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Bishop, Robert. \'93The Hidden Premise in the Causal Argument for Physicalism,\'94 August 2005. http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/2415/.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	42.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Blackburn, Simon. 
\i Essays in Quasi-Realism
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 1993.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	43.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Spreading the Word
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 1985.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	44.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Bloomfield, Paul. \'93Eudaimonia and Practical Rationality.\'94 
\i Oxford Studies Ancient Philosophy
\i0  265 (2012): 286.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	45.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Justice as a Self-Regarding Virtue.\'94 
\i Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
\i0  82, no. 1 (2011): 46\'9664.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	46.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Moral Reality
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2003.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	47.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Virtue Epistemology and the Epistemology of Virtue.\'94 
\i Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
\i0  60, no. 1 (2000): 23\'9643.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	48.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Bourget, David, and David J Chalmers. \'93What Do Philosophers Believe?\'94 
\i Philosophical Studies
\i0  170, no. 3 (2014): 465\'96500.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	49.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Boyd, Richard. \'93Finite Beings, Finite Goods: The Semantics, Metaphysics and Ethics of Naturalist Consequentialism, Part I1.\'94 
\i Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
\i0  66, no. 3 (2003): 505\'9653.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	50.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Boyd, Richard N. \'93How to Be a Moral Realist.\'94 
\i Contemporary Materialism
\i0 , 1988, 307.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	51.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Brandom, Robert. 
\i Reason in Philosophy: Animating Ideas
\i0 . Harvard University Press, 2009.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	52.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Brewer, Talbot. 
\i The Retrieval of Ethics
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2009.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	53.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Brink, David Owen. 
\i Moral Realism and the Foundations of Ethics
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 1989.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	54.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Brown, R. Stephen. 
\i Moral Virtue and Nature: A Defense of Ethical Naturalism
\i0 . Continuum, 2008.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	55.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Moral Virtue and Nature: A Defense of Ethical Naturalism
\i0 . Continuum, 2008.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	56.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Brown, Stephen. \'93Really Naturalizing Virtue.\'94 
\i Ethic@
\i0  4 (2005): 7\'9622.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	57.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Bultmann, Rudolf. 
\i Kerygma and Myth
\i0 . Harper, 1961.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	58.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Carr, David, and Jan Steutel. 
\i Virtue Ethics and Moral Education
\i0 . Routledge, 2005.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	59.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Chappell, Timothy. 
\i Values and Virtues: Aristotelianism in Contemporary Ethics
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2006.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	60.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Chorost, Michael. \'93Where Thomas Nagel Went Wrong.\'94 
\i Chronicle of Higher Education
\i0 , 2013.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	61.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Clarke, Bridget. \'93Virtue and Disagreement.\'94 
\i Ethical Theory and Moral Practice
\i0  13, no. 3 (2010): 273\'9691.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	62.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Clay, Jenny Strauss. 
\i The Politics of Olympus: Form and Meaning in the Major Homeric Hymns
\i0 . Vol. 10. Princeton University Press Princeton, NJ, 1989.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	63.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Clayton, Ted. \'93Political Philosophy of Alasdair MacIntyre,\'94 2015.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	64.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Connolly, John M. \'93Eudaimonism, Teleology, and the Pursuit of Happiness.\'94 
\i Faith and Philosophy
\i0  26, no. 3 (2009): 274\'9696.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	65.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Cooper, John. 
\i Complete Works of Plato
\i0 . Hackett, 1997.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	66.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Copp, David. \'93A Skeptical Challenge to Moral Non-Naturalism and a Defense of Constructivist Naturalism*.\'94 
\i Philosophical Studies
\i0  126, no. 2 (2005): 269\'9683.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	67.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Darwinian Skepticism About Moral Realism.\'94 
\i Philosophical Issues
\i0  18, no. 1 (2008): 186\'96206.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	68.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Why Naturalism?\'94 
\i Ethical Theory and Moral Practice
\i0  6, no. 2 (2003): 179\'96200.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	69.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Crisp, Roger. 
\i How Should One Live?: Essays on the Virtues
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 1996.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	70.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Virtue Ethics
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 1997.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	71.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Cudd, Ann. \'93Contractarianism.\'94 In 
\i The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
\i0 , edited by Edward N. Zalta, Winter 2013., 2013.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	72.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Cummiskey, David. 
\i Kantian Consequentialism
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 1996.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	73.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Cuneo, Terence. 
\i The Normative Web
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2007.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	74.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Cunningham, Lawrence. 
\i Intractable Disputes About the Natural Law: Alasdair Macintyre and Critics
\i0 . University of Notre Dame Press, 2009.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	75.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
D\'92Andrea, Thomas D. 
\i Tradition, Rationality, and Virtue: The Thought of Alasdair MacIntyre
\i0 . Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2006.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	76.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Darwall, Stephen. \'93How Should Ethics Relate to (the Rest Of) Philosophy?: Moore\'92s Legacy.\'94 
\i The Southern Journal of Philosophy
\i0  41, no. S1 (2003): 1\'9620.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	77.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Moral Discourse and Practice: Some Philosophical Approaches,\'94 1997.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	78.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The Second-Person Standpoint: Morality, Respect, and Accountability
\i0 . Harvard University Press, 2006.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	79.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Delapp, Kevin M. 
\i Metaethics
\i0 . Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2015. http://www.iep.utm.edu/metaethi/.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	80.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Dent, Nicholas John Henry. 
\i The Moral Psychology of the Virtues
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 1984.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	81.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Depaul, Michael R. \'93Review of Moral Realism and the Foundations of Ethics by David Brink.\'94 
\i Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
\i0  53, no. 3 (1993): 731\'9635.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	82.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
DePaul, Michael, and Linda Zagzebski. 
\i Intellectual Virtue: Perspectives from Ethics and Epistemology
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2007.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	83.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Dewey, John. \'93Propositions, Warranted Assertibility, and Truth.\'94 
\i The Journal of Philosophy
\i0 , 1941, 169\'9686.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	84.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
DeYoung, Rebecca Konyndyk. 
\i Glittering Vices: A New Look at the Seven Deadly Sins and Their Remedies
\i0 . Brazos Press, 2009.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	85.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Doggett, Tyler, and Andy Egan. \'93Wanting Things You Don\'92t Want.\'94 
\i Philosophers\'92 Imprint
\i0  7, no. 9 (2007): 1\'9617.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	86.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Doris, John M. \'93Heated Agreement: Lack of Character as Being for the Good.\'94 
\i Philosophical Studies
\i0  148, no. 1 (2010): 135\'9646.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	87.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Persons, Situations, and Virtue Ethics.\'94 
\i Nous
\i0  32, no. 4 (1998): 504\'9630.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	88.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Dreier, Jamie. \'93Dispositions and Fetishes: Externalist Models of Moral Motivation.\'94 
\i Philosophical and Phenomenological Research
\i0 , 2000, 619\'9638.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	89.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Driver, Julia. \'93Response to My Critics.\'94 
\i Utilitas
\i0  16, no. 01 (2004): 33\'9641.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	90.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Uneasy Virtue
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 2001.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	91.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Dunne, Joseph. \'93Ethics Revise: Flourishing as Vulnerable and Dependent, a Critical Notice of Alasdair MacIntyre\'92s Dependent Rational Animals.\'94 
\i International Journal of Philosophical Studies
\i0  10, no. 3 (2002): 339\'9663.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	92.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Dupr\'e9, John. \'93The Miracle of Monism.\'94 In 
\i Naturalism in Question
\i0 , edited by David Mario & Macarthur De Caro, 36\'9658. Harvard University Press, 2004.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	93.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Engelhardt, H Tristram. 
\i The Foundations of Bioethics
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 1996.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	94.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The Foundations of Christian Bioethics
\i0 . Taylor & Francis, 2000.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	95.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Enoch, David. \'93How Is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism?\'94 
\i The Journal of Ethics
\i0  13, no. 1 (2009): 15\'9650.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	96.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Taking Morality Seriously: A Defense of Robust Realism
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2011.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	97.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Farreira, Marinus. \'93Reasons from Neo-Aristotelian Naturalism,\'94 2011.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	98.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Feldman, Susan. \'93Objectivity, Pluralism and Relativism: A Critique of Macintyre\'92s Theory of Virtue.\'94 
\i The Southern Journal of Philosophy
\i0  24, no. 3 (1986): 307\'9619.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	99.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Feser, Edward. 
\i The Last Superstition: A Refutation of the New Atheism
\i0 . St Augustine Press, 2008.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	100.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Feyerabend, Paul. 
\i Against Method
\i0 . Verso, 1993.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	101.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Finaly, Stephen. \'93Four Faces of Moral Realism.\'94 
\i Philosophy Compass
\i0 , no. 2 (2007): 820\'9649.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	102.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fink, Hans. \'93Three Sorts of Naturalism.\'94 
\i European Journal of Philosophy
\i0  14, no. 2 (August 2006): 202\'9621.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	103.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Firth, Roderick. \'93Ethical Absolutism and the Ideal Observer.\'94 In 
\i Foundations of Ethics
\i0 , edited by Russ Shaffer-Landeau and Terence Cuneo. Blackwell, 2007.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	104.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fitterer, Robert John. 
\i Love and Objectivity in Virtue Ethics: Aristotle, Lonergan, and Nussbaum on Emotions and Moral Insight
\i0 . Toronto Press, 2008.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	105.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Foot, Philippa. \'93Does Moral Subjectivism Rest on a Mistake?\'94 
\i Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement
\i0  46 (2000): 107\'9623.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	106.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Morality as a System of Hypothetical Imperatives.\'94 
\i The Philosophical Review
\i0 , 1972, 305\'9616.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	107.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Natural Goodness
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2001.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	108.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Rationality and Virtue.\'94 In 
\i Norms, Values, and Society
\i0 , edited by Herlinde Pauer-Studer, 205\'9616. Springer, 1994.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	109.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Review of After Virtue.\'94 
\i Times Literary Supplement
\i0 , 1981, 1 097.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	110.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Virtues and Vices: And Other Essays in Moral Philosophy
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2002.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	111.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Frankena, William K. \'93The Naturalistic Fallacy.\'94 
\i Mind
\i0 , 1939, 464\'9677.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	112.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Freiman, Christopher. \'93Goodwill Toward Nature.\'94 
\i Environmental Values
\i0  18, no. 3 (2009): 343\'9659.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	113.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Friedman, Marilyn. \'93Feminist Virtue Ethics, Happiness, and Moral Luck.\'94 
\i Hypatia
\i0  24, no. 1 (2009): 29\'9640.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	114.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Garcia, J.L.A. \'93Alasdair MacIntyre.\'94 edited by Mark C. Murphy, 94\'96113. Cambridge University Press, 2003.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	115.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Garcia, Robert. \'93Closing in on Causal Closure.\'94 
\i Journal of Consciousness Studies
\i0  21, no. 1\'962 (2014): 96\'96109.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	116.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Gardiner, Stephen Mark. 
\i Virtue Ethics, Old and New
\i0 . Cornell University Press, 2005.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	117.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Geach, Peter T. \'93Good and Evil.\'94 
\i Analysis
\i0 , 1956, 33\'9642.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	118.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The Virtues
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 1977.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	119.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Geech, P. T. 
\i The Virtues
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 1977.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	120.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Gert, Bernard. 
\i Common Morality: Deciding What to Do
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2004.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	121.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Gibbard, Allan. \'93Normative Properties.\'94 
\i The Southern Journal of Philosophy
\i0  41, no. S1 (2003): 141\'9657.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	122.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Thinking How to Live
\i0 . Harvard University Press, 2009.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	123.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Wise Choices, Apt Feelings: A Theory of Normative Judgment
\i0 . Harvard University Press, 1992.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	124.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Giorgini, Giovanni. \'93Crick, Hampshire and MacIntyre, or Does an English Speaking Neo-Aristotelianism Exist?\'94 
\i Praxis International
\i0  9, no. 3 (1989): 249\'9672.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	125.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Godfrey-Smith, Peter. \'93Causal Pluralism.\'94 
\i Oxford Handbook of Causation
\i0 , 2010, 326\'9637.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	126.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Goetz, Stewart, and Charles Taliaferro. 
\i Naturalism
\i0 . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing, 2008.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	127.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Goldie, Peter. 
\i On Personality
\i0 . Psychology Press, 2004.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	128.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Gowans, Christopher W. \'93Virtue Ethics and Moral Relativism.\'94 
\i A Companion to Relativism
\i0 , 2011, 391\'96410.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	129.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Graham, Gordon. \'93Alasdair MacIntyre.\'94 edited by Mark C. Murphy. Cambridge University Press, 2003.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	130.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Hacker-Wright, John. \'93Human Nature, Personhood, and Ethical Naturalism.\'94 
\i Philosophy
\i0  84, no. 03 (2009): 413\'9627.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	131.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Moral Status in Virtue Ethics.\'94 
\i Philosophy
\i0  82, no. 03 (2007): 449\'9673.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	132.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Virtue Ethics without Right Action: Anscombe, Foot, and Contemporary Virtue Ethics.\'94 
\i The Journal of Value Inquiry
\i0  44, no. 2 (2010): 209\'9624.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	133.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93What Is Natural about Foot\'92s Ethical Naturalism?\'94 
\i Ratio
\i0  22, no. 3 (2009): 308\'9621.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	134.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Haldane, John. \'93A Return to Form in the Philosophy of Mind.\'94 
\i Ratio
\i0  11, no. 3 (1998): 253\'9677.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	135.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93On Coming Home to (Metaphysical) Realism.\'94 
\i Philosophy
\i0  71, no. 276 (1996): 287\'9696.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	136.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Putnam on Intentionality.\'94 
\i Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
\i0  52, no. 3 (1992): 671\'9682.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	137.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Hare, R. M. 
\i Language of MOrals
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 1991.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	138.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Harman, Gilbert. \'93Moral Explanations of Natural facts\'97Can Moral Claims Be Tested against Moral Reality?\'94 
\i The Southern Journal of Philosophy
\i0  24, no. S1 (1986): 57\'9668.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	139.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Moral Philosophy Meets Social Psychology: Virtue Ethics and the Fundamental Attribution Error.\'94 In 
\i Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
\i0 , 315\'9631. JSTOR, 1999.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	140.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Moral Relativism Defended.\'94 
\i The Philosophical Review
\i0 , 1975, 3\'9622.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	141.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Skepticism about Character Traits.\'94 
\i The Journal of Ethics
\i0  13, no. 2\'963 (2009): 235\'9642.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	142.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Hart, David Bentley. 
\i Atheist Delusions: The Christian Revolution and Its Fashionable Enemies
\i0 . Yale University Press, 2014.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	143.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Hauerwas, Stanley. \'93The Virtues of Alasdair MacIntyre.\'94 
\i First Things
\i0 , 2007.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	144.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Heinaman, Robert. 
\i Aristotle and Moral Realism
\i0 . Edited by Robert Heinaman. University College Londo, 1995.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	145.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Held, Virginia. 
\i The Ethics of Care: Personal, Political, and Global
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2005.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	146.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Hill, R Kevin. \'93MacIntyre\'92s Nietzsche.\'94 
\i International Studies in Philosophy
\i0  24, no. 2 (1992): 3\'9612.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	147.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Horgan, Terry, and Mark Timmons. \'93Metaethics After Moore,\'94 2006.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	148.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Horn, Laurence R. \'93Contradiction.\'94 In 
\i The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
\i0 , edited by Edward N. Zalta, Spring 2014., 2014.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	149.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Horton, John, and Susan Mendus. 
\i After MacIntyre: Critical Perspectives on the Work of Alasdair MacIntyre
\i0 . University of Notre Dame Press, 1994.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	150.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Alasdair MacIntyre: After Virtue and After.\'94 In 
\i Current Controversies in Virtue Theory
\i0 , edited by Mark Alfano. Routledge, 2015.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	151.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Huang, Yong. \'93The Self-Centeredness Objection to Virtue Ethics.\'94 Edited by Robert E. Wood. 
\i American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly
\i0  84, no. 4 (2010): 651\'9692.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	152.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Hudson, Stephen D. \'93Human Character and Morality.\'94 
\i No\'c3\'bbs
\i0  23, no. 3 (1989): 389\'9690.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	153.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Hume, David. 
\i Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals
\i0 , n.d.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	154.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Treatise of Human Nature
\i0 , n.d.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	155.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Huneman, Philippe. \'93Naturalising Purpose: From Comparative Anatomy to the `adventure of Reason\'92.\'94 
\i Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
\i0  37, no. 4 (2006): 649\'9674.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	156.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Hurka, Thomas. 
\i Virtue, Vice, and Value
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2003.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	157.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Hursthouse, Rosalind. \'93Neo-Aristotelian Ethical Naturalism.\'94 
\i The International Encyclopedia of Ethics
\i0 , 2013.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	158.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i On Virtue Ethics
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 1998.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	159.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Practical Wisdom: A Mundane Account.\'94 In 
\i Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
\i0 , 106:283\'96307. Wiley-Blackwell, 2006.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	160.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Virtue Ethics.\'94 In 
\i The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
\i0 , edited by Edward N. Zalta, 2013.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	161.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Virtue Ethics and Human Nature.\'94 
\i Hume Studies
\i0  25, no. 1 (1999): 67\'9682.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	162.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Virtue Theory and Abortion.\'94 
\i Philosophy & Public Affairs
\i0 , 1991, 223\'9646.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	163.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Jackson, Frank. \'93From Metaphysics to Ethics,\'94 1998.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	164.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Jelbert, S.A. et. al. \'93Using the Aesop\'92s Fable Paradigm to Investigate Causal Understanding of Water Displacement by New Caledonian Crows.\'94 
\i Public LIbrary of Science
\i0  9, no. 3 (2014).\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	165.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Johnson, Monte Ransome. 
\i Aristotle on Teleology
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2005.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	166.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Jones, Kile. \'93The Causal Closure of Physics: An Explanation and Critique\'94 64, no. 3 (2008).\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	167.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Joyce, Richard. \'93Irrealism and the Genealogy of Morals.\'94 
\i Ratio
\i0  26, no. 4 (2013): 351\'9672.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	168.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Moral Anti-Realism.\'94 In 
\i The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
\i0 , edited by Edward N. Zalta, 2015.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	169.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The Myth of Morality
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 2001.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	170.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kamtekar, Rachana. \'93Comments on Robert Adams, A Theory of Virtue: Excellence in Being for the Good.\'94 
\i Philosophical Studies
\i0  148, no. 1 (2010): 147\'9658.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	171.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Situationism and Virtue Ethics on the Content of Our Character.\'94 
\i Ethics
\i0  114, no. 3 (2004): 458\'9691.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	172.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kant, Immanuel. 
\i Critique of Practical Reason
\i0 . Translated by Werner S Pluhar. Hackett Publishing, 2002.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	173.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals
\i0 . Yale University Press, 2002.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	174.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kauppinen, Antti. \'93Moral Sentimentalism.\'94 In 
\i The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
\i0 , edited by Edward N. Zalta, Spring 2014., 2014.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	175.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kawall, Jason. \'93In Defense of the Primacy of the Virtues.\'94 
\i Journal of Ethics & Social Philosophy
\i0  3 (2008): i.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	176.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Keller, Simon. \'93Virtue Ethics Is Self-Effacing.\'94 
\i Australasian Journal of Philosophy
\i0  85, no. 2 (June 2007): 221\'9631.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	177.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kelly, Erin. \'93Against Naturalism in Ethics,\'94 2004.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	178.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
a Kempis, Thomas. 
\i The Imitation of Christ in Four Books
\i0 . Gill & Son, 1878.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	179.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kenny, Anthony. \'93The Aristotelian Ethics: A Study of the Relationship between the Eudemian and Nicomachean Ethics of Aristotle,\'94 1978.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	180.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kim, Jaegwon. 
\i Philosophy of Mind
\i0 . Westview Press, 1996.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	181.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Physicalism, or Something near Enough
\i0 . Princeton University Press, 2007.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	182.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Korkut, Buket. \'93MacIntyre\'92s Nietzsche or Nietzschean MacIntyre?\'94 
\i Philosophy & Social Criticism
\i0  38, no. 2 (2012): 199\'96214.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	185.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kramer, Matthew H. 
\i Moral Realism as a Moral Doctrine
\i0 . Vol. 3. John Wiley & Sons, 2009.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	186.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Krausz, Michael. \'93Relativism and Foundationalism: Some Distinctions and Strategies.\'94 
\i The Monist
\i0 , 1984, 395\'96404.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	187.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kreeft, Peter. 
\i Summa Philosophica
\i0 . St. Augustine, 2012.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	188.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kuhn, Thomas. 
\i The Structure of Scientific Revolutions
\i0 . University of Chicago Press, 1975.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	189.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Kupperman, Joel J. \'93The Indispensability of Character.\'94 
\i Philosophy
\i0 , no. 02 (April 2001): 239\'9650.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	190.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Virtue in Virtue Ethics.\'94 
\i The Journal of Ethics
\i0  13, no. 2\'963 (June 2009): 243\'9655.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	191.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Lear, Jonathan. 
\i Aristotle: The Desire to Understand
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 1988.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	192.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Lebar, Mark. \'93Prichard vs. Plato: Intuition vs. Reflection.\'94 
\i Canadian Journal of Philosophy
\i0  37, no. sup1 (January 2007): 1\'9632.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	193.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
LeBar, Mark. \'93Virtue Ethics and Deontic Constraints.\'94 
\i Ethics
\i0  119, no. 4 (2009): 642\'9671.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	194.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Lenman, James. \'93Moral Naturalism.\'94 In 
\i The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
\i0 , edited by Edward N. Zalta, 2014.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	195.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Leslie, Sarah-Jane. \'93Generics: Cognition and Acquisition.\'94 
\i Philosophical Review
\i0  117, no. 1 (2008): 1\'9647.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	196.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Lewis, C. S. 
\i Mere Christianity
\i0 . Zondervan, 1952.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	197.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Miracles
\i0 . Zondervan, 2001.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	198.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Surprised by Joy: The Shape of My Early Life
\i0 . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 1966.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	199.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The Abolition of Man: How Education Develops Man\'92s Sense of Morality
\i0 . Macmillan, 1947.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	200.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The Allegory of Love
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 2013.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	201.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The Discarded Image: An Introduction to Medieval and Renaissance Literature
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 1994.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	202.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93The Four Loves,\'94 1960.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	203.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The Screwtape Letters
\i0 . Macmillan, 1941.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	204.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Liddell, Henry George, and Robert Scott. 
\i An Intermediate Greek-English Lexicon: Founded upon the Seventh Edition of Liddell and Scott\'92s Greek-English Lexicon
\i0 . Harper & Brothers, 1896.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	205.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Little, Margaret Olivia. \'93Seeing and Caring: The Role of Affect in Feminist Moral Epistemology.\'94 
\i Hypatia
\i0  10, no. 3 (1995): 117\'9637.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	206.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Seeing and Caring: The Role of Affect in Feminist Moral Epistemology.\'94 In 
\i Foundations of Ethics: An Anthology
\i0 , edited by Russ Shaffer-Landeau and Terence Cuneo, 420\'9631. Blackwell, 2007.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	207.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Virtue as Knowledge: Objections from the Philosophy of Mind.\'94 In 
\i Foundations of Ethics: An Anthology
\i0 , edited by Russ Shaffer-Landeau and Terence Cuneo, 252\'9664. Blackwell, 2007.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	208.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Louden, Robert B. \'93On Some Vices of Virtue Ethics.\'94 
\i American Philosophical Quarterly
\i0 , 1984, 227\'9636.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	209.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Louden, Robert B. \'93On Some Vices of Virtue Ethics.\'94 
\i American Philosophical Quarterly
\i0  21, no. 3 (1984): 227\'9636.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	210.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Lowe, E.J. \'93Causal Closure Principles and Emergentism.\'94 
\i Philosophy
\i0  75, no. 04 (2000): 571\'9685.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	211.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Lutz, Christopher. 
\i Alasdair MacIntyre
\i0 . \\textbar Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2015.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	212.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Reading Alasdair MacIntyre\'92s After Virtue
\i0 . A&C Black, 2012.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	213.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Tradition in the Ethics of Alasdair MacIntyre
\i0 . Lexington Books, 2004.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	214.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Macdonald, Cynthia, and Graham Macdonald. 
\i McDowell and His Critics
\i0 . John Wiley & Sons, 2008.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	215.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
MacIntyre, Alasdair. 
\i After Virtue
\i0 . University of Notre Dame Press, 1984.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	216.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Against the Self-Images of the Age: Essays on Ideology and Philosophy,\'94 1971.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	217.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93A Partial Response to My Critics.\'94 In 
\i After MacIntyre
\i0 , 283\'96304. University of Notre Dame Press, 1994.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	218.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Dependent Rational Animals: Why Human Beings Need the Virtues
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 1999.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	219.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Does Applied Ethics Rest on a Mistake?\'94 
\i The Monist
\i0  67, no. 4 (1984): 498\'96513.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	220.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Egoism and Altruism.\'94 In 
\i Encyclopedia of Philosophy
\i0 , edited by Paul Edwards, 462. New York, Macmillan, 1967.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	221.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Epistemological Crises, Dramatic Narrative and the Philosophy of Science.\'94 
\i The Monist
\i0 , 1977, 453\'9672.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	222.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i God, Philosophy, Universities: A Selective History of the Catholic Philosophical Tradition
\i0 . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2011.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	223.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93How Moral Agents Became Ghosts or Why the History of Ethics Diverged from that of the Philosophy of Mind.\'94 
\i Synthese
\i0  53, no. 2 (1982): 295\'96312.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	224.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Hume on Is and Ought.\'94 
\i The Philosophical Review
\i0 , 1959, 451\'9668.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	225.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Marxism and Christianity,\'94 1968.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	226.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Plain Persons and Moral Philosophy.\'94 
\i American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly
\i0  66, no. 1 (1992): 3\'9619.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	227.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Relativism, Power and Philosophy.\'94 In 
\i Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association
\i0 , 5\'9622. JSTOR, 1985.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	228.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Reply to Roque.\'94 
\i Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
\i0  51, no. 3 (1991): 619\'9620.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	229.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Secularization and Moral Change
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 1967.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	230.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93The Idea of an Educated Public.\'94 
\i Education and Values: The Richard Peters Lectures
\i0  15 (1987).\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	231.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93The Nature of the Virtues.\'94 
\i Hastings Center Report
\i0  11, no. 2 (1981): 27\'9634.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	232.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93The Privatization of Good: An Inaugural Lecture.\'94 
\i The Review of Politics
\i0  52, no. 03 (1990): 344\'9661.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	233.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93The Relationship of Philosophy to Its Past.\'94 
\i Philosophy in History
\i0 , 1984, 31\'9648.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	234.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The Tasks of Philosophy: Selected Essays, Volume 1
\i0 . Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press, 2006.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	235.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry
\i0 . University of Notre Dame Press, 1990.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	236.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Whose Justice? Which Rationality?
\i0  University of Notre Dame Press, 1988.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	237.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Mackie, John. 
\i Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong
\i0 . Penguin UK, 1977.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	238.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Martinez, Joel A. \'93Is Virtue Ethics Self-Effacing?\'94 
\i Australasian Journal of Philosophy
\i0  89, no. 2 (June 2011): 277\'9688.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	239.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Mason, Michelle. \'93Aretaic Appraisal and Practical Reason.\'94 
\i Southern Journal of Philosophy
\i0  44, no. 4 (2006): 629\'9656.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	240.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Mayr, Ernst. \'93The Idea of Teleology.\'94 
\i Journal of the History of Ideas
\i0  53, no. 1 (1992): pp. 117\'9635.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	241.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Mcaleer, Sean. \'93An Aristotelian Account of Virtue Ethics: An Essay in Moral Taxonomy.\'94 
\i Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
\i0  88, no. 2 (June 2007): 208\'9625.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	242.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
McAleer, Sean. \'93Four Solutions to the Alleged Incompleteness of Virtue Ethics.\'94 
\i Journal of Ethics & Social Philosophy
\i0  4 (2009).\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	243.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
McDonough, Richard. \'93Roy Wood Sellars (1880-1973).\'94 In 
\i Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
\i0 , 2015.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	244.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
McDowell, John. 
\i Mind and World
\i0 . Harvard University Press, 1996.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	245.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Mind, Value, and Reality
\i0 . Harvard University Press, 1998.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	246.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Naturalism in the Philosophy of Mind.\'94 
\i Naturalism in Question
\i0 , 2004, 91\'96105.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	247.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93The Role of Eudaimonia in Aristotle\'92s Ethics\'92.\'94 In 
\i Essays on Aristotle\'92s Ethics
\i0 , edited by Am\'e9lie Oksenberg Rorty, 359\'9676. University of California Press, 1980.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	248.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Two Sorts of Naturalism.\'94 
\i Mind, Value, and Reality
\i0  167 (1998): 97.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	249.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Values and Secondary Qualities.\'94 In 
\i Morality and Objectivity
\i0 , edited by Ted Honderich, 110\'9629. Routledge, 1985.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	250.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Virtue and Reason.\'94 
\i The Monist
\i0  62, no. 3 (1979): 331\'9650.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	251.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
McMylor, Peter. 
\i Alasdair MacIntyre: Critic of Modernity
\i0 . Routledge, 2005.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	252.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Milbank, John. 
\i Theology and Social Theory: Beyond Secular Reason
\i0 . John Wiley & Sons, 2008.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	253.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Miller, Mitchell. \'93First of All.\'94 
\i Ancient Philosophy
\i0  21, no. 2 (2001): 251\'9676.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	254.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Millikan, Ruth Garrett. \'93In Defense of Proper Functions.\'94 
\i Philosophy of Science
\i0 , 1989, 288\'96302.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	255.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Mill, John Stuart. 
\i Utilitarianism
\i0 , 1861.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	256.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Montero, Barbara. \'93Varieties of Causal Closure.\'94 
\i Physicalism and Mental Causation: The Metaphysics of Mind and Action
\i0 , 2003, 173\'9687.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	257.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Moore, G. E. 
\i Principia Ethica
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 1903.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	258.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Moreland, JP. 
\i The Recalcitrant Imago Dei: Human Persons and the Failure of Naturalism
\i0 . Hymns Ancient and Modern Ltd, 2009.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	259.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Morgan, Lloyd. \'93Naturalism.\'94 
\i The Monist
\i0  6, no. 1 (1895): 76\'9690.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	260.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Morgan, Seiriol. \'93Naturalism and Normativity.\'94 
\i Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
\i0  72, no. 2 (2006): 319\'9644.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	261.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Murdoch, Iris. 
\i The Sovereignty of Good over Other Concepts
\i0 . Mouette Press, 1998.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	262.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Murphy, Mark. \'93The Natural Law Tradition in Ethics.\'94 In 
\i The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
\i0 , edited by Edward N. Zalta, Winter 2011., 2011.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	263.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Murphy, Mark C. 
\i Alasdair MacIntyre
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 2003.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	264.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Nagel, Thomas. \'93Ethics as an Autonomous Theoretical Subject.\'94 In 
\i Morality as a Biological Phenomenon: The Pre-Suppositions of Sociobiological Research
\i0 , edited by Gunther S. (ed.) Stent, 196\'96205. University of California Press, 1980.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	265.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Mind and Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo-Darwinian Conception of Nature Is Almost Certainly False
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2012.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	266.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Other Minds: Critical Essays 1969-1994
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 1999.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	267.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Secular Philosophy and the Religious Temperament
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2009.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	268.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The Last Word
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2001.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	269.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The View from Nowhere
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 1989.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	270.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Ney, Alyssa. \'93Physicalism as an Attitude.\'94 
\i Philosophical Studies
\i0  138, no. 1 (2008): 1\'9615.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	271.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Nussbaum, Martha. \'93Aristotle on Human Nature and the Foundations of Ethics.\'94 In 
\i World, Mind, and Ethics: Essays on the Ethical Philosophy of Bernard Williams
\i0 , edited by J.E.J. Altham and Ross Harrison, 86\'96131. Cambridge University Press, 1995.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	272.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Aristotle on Human Nature and the Foundations of Ethics.\'94 In 
\i World, Mind, and Ethics: Essays on the Ethical Philosophy of Bernard Williams
\i0 , edited by J.E.J. Altham and Ross Harrison, 86\'96131. Cambridge University Press, 1995.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	273.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Recoiling from Reason.\'94 
\i The New York Review of Books
\i0  36, no. 19 (1989): 36\'9641.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	274.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
NUSSBAUM, Martha C. 
\i Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, Species Membership
\i0 . Harvard University Press, 2009.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	275.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Nussbaum, Martha C. \'93Non-Relative Virtues: An Aristotelian Approach.\'94 
\i Midwest Studies In Philosophy
\i0  13, no. 1 (September 1988): 32\'9653.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	276.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Nussbaum, Martha C. \'93Virtue Ethics: A Misleading Category?\'94 
\i The Journal of Ethics
\i0  3, no. 3 (1999): 163\'96201.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	277.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Oakes, Edward. \'93The Achievement of Alasdair Macintyre.\'94 
\i First Things
\i0 , 1996.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	278.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Papineau, David. \'93Mind the Gap.\'94 
\i Nous
\i0  32, no. S12 (1998): 373\'9688.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	279.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Naturalism.\'94 In 
\i The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
\i0 , edited by Edward N. Zalta, 2015.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	280.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Physicalism and Its Discontents.\'94 edited by Carl Gillet and Barry Loewer. Cambridge University Press, 2007.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	281.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Pierce, Jessica, and George Randels. 
\i Contemporary Bioethics: A Reader with Cases
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2010.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	282.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Pincoffs, Edmund. \'93Quandary Ethics.\'94 
\i Mind
\i0 , 1971, 552\'9671.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	283.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Pinkard, Terry. \'93Alasdair MacIntyre.\'94 edited by Mark C. Murphy. Cambridge University Press, 2003.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	284.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Review of Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry, by Alasdair MacIntyre.\'94 
\i Ethics
\i0  102, no. 1 (1991): 162\'9664.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	285.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Plantinga, Alvin. 
\i Evolution vs. Naturalism
\i0 . Books and Culture, 2008. http://www.booksandculture.com/articles/2008/julaug/11.37.html.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	286.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Where the Conflict Really Lies: Science, Religion, and Naturalism
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2011.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	287.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Poliakov, L\'e9on. 
\i Harvest of Hate: The Nazi Program for the Destruction of the Jews of Europe
\i0 . Schocken Books, 1979.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	288.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Porter, Jean. \'93Alasdair MacIntyre.\'94 edited by Mark C. Murphy. Cambridge University Press, 2003.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	289.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prasada, Sandeep, Sangeet Khemlani, Sarah-Jane Leslie, and Sam Glucksberg. \'93Conceptual Distinctions amongst Generics.\'94 
\i Cognition
\i0  126, no. 3 (2013): 405\'9622.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	290.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Prinz, Jesse. \'93The Normativity Challenge: Cultural Psychology Provides the Real Threat to Virtue Ethics.\'94 
\i The Journal of Ethics
\i0  13, no. 2\'963 (June 2009): 117\'9644.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	291.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Putnam, Hilary. \'93Sense, Nonsense, and the Senses: An Inquiry into the Powers of the Human Mind.\'94 
\i The Journal of Philosophy
\i0 , 1994, 445\'96517.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	292.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The Collapse of the Fact / Value Dichotomy and Other Essays
\i0 . Harvard University Press, 2002.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	293.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93The Content and Appeal of Naturalism.\'94 In 
\i Naturalism in Question
\i0 , edited by Mario De Caro and David MacArthur. Harvard University Press, 2009.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	294.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Radic, Stjepan. \'93Two Different Approaches to the Re-Aristotelisation of Contemporary Ethics: Neo-Aristotelianism of Alasdair MacIntyre and Martha Nussbaum.\'94 
\i Filozofska Istrazivanja
\i0  132 (2013): 643\'9657.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	295.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Railton, Peter. \'93Aesthetic Value, Moral Value, and the Ambitions of Naturalism.\'94 
\i Aesthetics and Ethics: Essays at the Intersection
\i0 , 1998, 59\'96105.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	296.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Moral Realism.\'94 
\i Philosophical Review
\i0  95, no. 2 (1986).\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	297.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Rea, Michael. \'93How Successful Is Naturalism?\'94 edited by ed. Georg Gasser. Ontos, 2007.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	298.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Rehg, William, and Darin Davis. \'93Conceptual Gerrymandering? The Alignment of Hursthouse\'92s Naturalistic Virtue Ethics with Neo-Kantian Non-Naturalism.\'94 
\i The Southern Journal of Philosophy
\i0  41, no. 4 (2003): 583\'96600.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	299.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Reitsma, Regan Lance. \'93The Peculiar Flavor of Nagel\'92s Metaethics.\'94 
\i Expositions
\i0 , 2014.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	300.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Ricoeur, Paul. 
\i Freud and Philosophy
\i0 . Translated by D (Savage. Yale University Press, 1970.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	301.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Rist, John. 
\i Plato\'92s Moral Realism
\i0 . The Catholic University of America Press, 2012.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	302.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Robinson, Marilynne. 
\i Gilead
\i0 . Picador, 2006.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	303.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Roque, Alicia Juarrero. \'93Language Competence and Tradition-Constituted Rationality.\'94 
\i Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
\i0  51, no. 3 (1991): 611\'9617.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	304.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Rorty, Richard. 
\i Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth: Philosophical Papers
\i0 . Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press, 1991.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	305.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Rosenberg, Alex. 
\i The Atheist\'92s Guide to Reality: Enjoying Life without Illusions
\i0 . WW Norton & Company, 2011.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	306.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Rubin, Michael. \'93Is Goodness a Homeostatic Property Cluster?*.\'94 
\i Ethics
\i0  118, no. 3 (2008): 496\'96528.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	307.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Ruse, Michael. \'93Taking Darwin Seriously: A Naturalistic Approach to Philosophy,\'94 1986.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	308.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Russell, Daniel C. \'93Agent-Based Virtue Ethics and the Fundamentality of Virtue.\'94 
\i American Philosophical Quarterly
\i0  45, no. 4 (October 2008): 329\'9647.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	309.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Practical Intelligence and the Virtues
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2009.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	310.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Russell, Daniel C. 
\i The Cambridge Companion to Virtue Ethics
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 2013.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	311.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Russell, E. S. 
\i Form and Function: A Contribution to the History of Animal Morphology
\i0 . Chicago, 1916.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	312.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Sahlins, Marshall. 
\i Culture and Practical Reason
\i0 , 1978.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	313.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Sandel, Michael J. 
\i Liberalism and the Limits of Justice
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 1998.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	314.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Sanford, Jonathan. 
\i Before Virtue:Assessing Contemporary Virtue Ethics
\i0 . The Catholic University of American Press, 2015.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	315.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Sass, Louis A. \'93Civilized Madness: Schizophrenia, Self-Consciousness and the Modern Mind.\'94 
\i History of the Human Sciences
\i0  7, no. 2 (1994): 83\'96120.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	316.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Schaber, Peter. \'93Normative Facts.\'94 
\i Studies into the Foundations of an Integral Theory of Practice and Cognition
\i0 , 2005, 107\'9622.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	317.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Schroeder, Mark. 
\i Noncognitivism in Ethics
\i0 . Routledge, 2010.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	318.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Seachris, Joshua W. \'93The Meaning of Life as Narrative.\'94 
\i Philo
\i0  12, no. 1 (2009): 5\'9623.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	319.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Sellars, Roy Wood. \'93Why Naturalism and Not Materialism?\'94 
\i The Philosophical Review
\i0  36, no. 3 (1927): 216\'9625.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	320.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Shafer-Landau, Russ. 
\i Ethical Theory: An Anthology
\i0 . Edited by Russ Shafer-Landau. Wiley-Blackwell, 2012.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	321.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Ethics as Philosophy: A Defense of Ethical Nonnaturalism.\'94 In 
\i Ethical Theory: An Anthology
\i0 , edited by Russ Shafer-Landau, 210\'9621, 2007.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	322.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Moral Realism: A Defence
\i0 . 4. Oxford University Press, 2003.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	323.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Shaffer-Landeau, Russ, and Terence Cuneo, eds. 
\i Foundations of Ethics: An Anthology
\i0 . Blackwell, 2007.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	324.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Shermer, Michael. 
\i Why People Believe Weird Things: Pseudoscience, Superstition, and Other Confusions of Our Time
\i0 . Macmillan, 2002.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	325.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Sinclair, Neil. \'93Two Kinds of Naturalism in Ethics.\'94 
\i Ethical Theory and Moral Practice
\i0  9, no. 4 (2006): pp. 417\'9639.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	326.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Slote, Michael. \'93Agent-Based Virtue Ethics.\'94 
\i Midwest Studies in Philosophy
\i0  20, no. 1 (1995): 83\'96101.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	327.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Ethics Naturalized.\'94 
\i Philosophical Perspectives
\i0 , 1992, 355\'9676.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	328.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i From Morality to Virtue
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 1992.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	329.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Moral Sentimentalism
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2010.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	330.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Morals from Motives
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2001.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	331.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The Impossibility of Perfection: Aristotle, Feminism, and the Complexities of Ethics
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2011.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	332.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Smirnova, Anna et al. \'93Crows Spontaneously Exhibit Analogical Reasoning.\'94 
\i Current Biology
\i0  25, no. 2 (2015): 256\'9660.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	333.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Smith, Michael. \'93The Externalist Challenge.\'94 In 
\i Foundations of Ethics: An Anthology
\i0 , edited by Russ Shafer-Landau, 231\'9643, 2007.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	334.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Smith, Michael R. 
\i The Moral Problem
\i0 . Wiley-Blackwell, 1994.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	335.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Smith, Quentin. \'93The Metaphilosophy of Naturalism.\'94 
\i Philo
\i0  4, no. 2 (2001): 195\'96215.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	336.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Smith, R Scott. 
\i Virtue Ethics and Moral Knowledge: Philosophy of Language after MacIntyre and Hauerwas
\i0 . Gower Publishing, Ltd., 2003.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	337.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Solomon, David. \'93Internal Objections to Virtue Ethics.\'94 
\i Midwest Studies In Philosophy
\i0  13, no. 1 (1988): 428\'9641.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	338.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Sreenivasan, Gopal. \'93Errors about Errors: Virtue Theory and Trait Attribution.\'94 
\i Mind
\i0  111, no. 441 (January 2002): 47\'9668.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	339.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Statman, Daniel. \'93Introduction to Virtue Ethics.\'94 In 
\i Virtue Ethics
\i0 , edited by Daniel Statman, 1\'9641. Georgetown University Press, 1997.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	340.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Stichter, Matt. \'93Virtues, Skills, and Right Action.\'94 
\i Ethical Theory and Moral Practice
\i0  14, no. 1 (April 2010): 73\'9686.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	341.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Stocker, Michael. \'93The Schizophrenia of Modern Ethical Theories.\'94 
\i The Journal of Philosophy
\i0  73, no. 14 (1976): 453\'9666.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	342.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Storey, David. \'93Nihilism, Nature, and the Collapse of the Cosmos.\'94 
\i Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy
\i0  7, no. 2 (2011): 6\'9625.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	343.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Street, Sharon. \'93A Darwinian Dilemma for Realist Theories of Value.\'94 
\i Philosophical Studies
\i0  127, no. 1 (2006): 109\'9666.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	344.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Stroud, Barry. \'93The Charm of Naturalism.\'94 In 
\i Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association
\i0 , 43\'9655. JSTOR, 1996.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	345.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Stump, Eleonore. \'93Aquinas on the Mechanisms of Cognition: Sense and Phantasia.\'94 
\i Medieval Analyses in Language and Cognition, Historisk-Filosofiske Meddelelser
\i0  77 (1999): 377\'9695.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	346.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Sturgeon, Nicholas L. \'93Moore on Ethical Naturalism*.\'94 
\i Ethics
\i0  113, no. 3 (2003): 528\'9656.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	347.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Superson, Anita. 
\i The Moral Skeptic
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2009.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	348.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Svensson, Frans. \'93Virtue Ethics and the Search for an Account of Right Action.\'94 
\i Ethical Theory and Moral Practice
\i0  13, no. 3 (2009): 255\'9671.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	349.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Swanton, Christine. \'93Virtue Ethics and the Problem of Demandingness.\'94 
\i Chappell (2009) Pp
\i0 , 2009, 104\'9622.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	350.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Virtue Ethics: A Pluralistic View
\i0 . Clarendon Press, 2003.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	351.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Swift, Jonathan, Herbert Davis, and Sir Harold Herbert Williams. 
\i Gulliver\'92s Travels: 1726
\i0 . Vol. 11. Blackwell, 1965.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	352.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Swinburne, Richard. 
\i The Existence of God
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2004.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	353.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Taylor, Charles. \'93Atomism.\'94 
\i Philosophical Papers
\i0  2 (1985): 187\'96210.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	354.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Justice After Virtue.\'94 In 
\i After MacIntyre
\i0 , 16\'9643. University of Notre Dame Press, 1994.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	355.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Sources of the Self: The Making of the Modern Identity
\i0 . Harvard University Press, 1989.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	356.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Taylor, Gabriele. 
\i Deadly Vices
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2006.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	357.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Tessman, Lisa. 
\i Burdened Virtues: Virtue Ethics for Liberatory Struggles
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2005.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	358.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93The Holy Bible English Standard Edition.\'94 
\i Crossway: Wheaton, Illinois
\i0 , 2002.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	359.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Thompson, Allen. \'93Reconciling Themes in Neo-Aristotelian Meta-Ethics.\'94 
\i The Journal of Value Inquiry
\i0  41, no. 2 (2007): 245\'9663.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	360.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Thompson, Michael. 
\i Life and Action
\i0 . Harvard University Press, 2008.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	361.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93The Representation of Life.\'94 In 
\i Virtues and Reasons
\i0 , edited by Gavin Rosalind, Lawrence Hursthouse and Warren Quinn, 247\'9696. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	362.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Thomson, Judith Jarvis. 
\i Goodness and Advice
\i0 . Princeton University Press, 2009.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	363.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Timmons, Mark. 
\i Morality without Foundations: A Defense of Ethical Contextualism
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 1999.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	364.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Timpe, Kevin, and Craig A Boyd. 
\i Virtues and Their Vices
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2014.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	365.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Toner, Christopher. \'93Sorts of Naturalism: Requirements for a Successful Theory.\'94 
\i Metaphilosophy
\i0  39, no. 2 (2008): 220\'9650.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	366.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Virtue Ethics and the Nature and Forms of Egoism:\'94 Edited by Michael DePaul. 
\i Journal of Philosophical Research
\i0  35 (2010): 275\'96303.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	367.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Turner, Stephen P. \'93Alasdair MacIntyre.\'94 edited by Mark C. Murphy. Cambridge University Press, 2003.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	368.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Twain, Mark. 
\i Adventures of Huckleberry Finn
\i0 . Lathifa, 2014.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	369.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Unger, Peter. 
\i Empty Ideas: A Critique of Analytic Philosophy
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 2014.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	370.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Upton, Candace L. \'93Virtue Ethics and Moral Psychology: The Situationism Debate.\'94 
\i The Journal of Ethics
\i0  13, no. 2\'963 (2009): 103\'9615.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	371.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Van Zyl, Liezl. \'93Against Radical Pluralism.\'94 In 
\i Current Controversies in Virtue Theory
\i0 , edited by Mark Alfano. Routledge, 2015.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	372.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Vlachos, Hierotheos, and Effie Mavromichali. 
\i The Illness and Cure of the Soul in the Orthodox Tradition
\i0 . Birth of the Theotokos Monastery Press, 2010.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	373.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Vogler, Candace. \'93Modern Moral Philosophy Again: Isolating the Promulgation Problem.\'94 
\i Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
\i0 , New Series, 106 (2006): pp. 347\'9664.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	374.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Wachbroit, Robert. \'93Relativism and Virtue.\'94 
\i Yale Law Journal
\i0  94 (1984): 1559.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	375.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Wallace, R. Jay. \'93Practical Reason.\'94 In 
\i The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
\i0 , edited by Edward N. Zalta, Summer 2014., 2014.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	376.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Wallach, John R. \'93Contemporary Aristotelianism.\'94 
\i Political Theory
\i0  20, no. 4 (1992): 613\'9641.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	377.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Ward, Keith. \'93Kant\'92s Teleological Ethics.\'94 
\i The Philosophical Quarterly
\i0  21, no. 85 (1971): 337\'9651.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	378.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Watson, Gary. \'93On the Primacy of Character.\'94 
\i Identity, Character, and Morality: Essays in Moral Psychology
\i0 , 1990, 449\'9683.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	379.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Watson, Peter. 
\i The Modern Mind: An Intellectual History of the Twentieth Century
\i0 . New York: HarperCollins, 2001.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	380.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Weinstein, Jack Russell. 
\i On MacIntyre
\i0 . Wadsworth, 2003.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	381.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Welchman, Jennifer. 
\i The Practice of Virtue: Classic and Contemporary Readings in Virtue Ethics
\i0 . Hackett Publishing, 2006.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	382.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Wielenberg, Erik. \'93In Defense of Non-Natural, Non-Theistic Moral Realism.\'94 
\i Faith and Philosophy
\i0  26, no. 1 (2009): 23\'9641.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	383.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93On the Evolutionary Debunking of Morality*.\'94 
\i Ethics
\i0  120, no. 3 (2010): 441\'9664.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	384.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93The Nature of Moral Virtue.\'94 Dissertation, PhD dissertation, 2000. Web.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	385.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Williams, Bernard. 
\i Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy
\i0 . Taylor & Francis, 2011.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	386.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Internal and External Reasons.\'94 In 
\i Ethical Theory: An Anthology
\i0 , edited by Russ Shafer-Landau, 292\'9698, 2007.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	387.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Williams, Raymond. 
\i Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society
\i0 . Oxford University Press, 1985.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	388.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Wolterstorff, Nicholas. 
\i Justice: Rights and Wrongs
\i0 . Princeton University Press, 2010.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	389.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Wood, W. Jay. \'93Prudence.\'94 In 
\i Virtues and Their Vices
\i0 , edited by Kevin Timpe and Craig A Boyd. Oxford University Press, 2014.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	390.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Zagzebski, Linda. 
\i Divine Motivation Theory
\i0 . Cambridge Univeristy Press, 2004.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	391.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Exemplarist Virtue Theory.\'94 
\i Metaphilosophy
\i0  41, no. 1\'962 (2010): 41\'9657.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	392.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Virtues of the Mind: An Inquiry Into the Nature of Virtue and the Ethical Foundations of Knowledge
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 1996.\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	393.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Zammito, John. \'93Teleology Then and Now: The Question of Kant\'92s Relevance for Contemporary Controversies over Function in Biology.\'94 
\i Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part
\i0  37, no. 4 (2006): 748\'9670.\
}