{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 #Virtue Introduction\
\
### Thesis\
\
In this dissertation, I shall defend the thesis that: **virtues are excellent character traits that all human beings as practical reasoners need, for virtues partly constitute the realization of our natural human telos.** \
\
### The Questions\
\
Put most broadly, the main problem to be addressed is: What is virtue in relation to practical reason and to our human telos? Below, I tackle the division of these labors into a series of chapters.  Each chapter is devoted to a set of sub-problems. For instance, what is virtue and is it really \'93necessary\'94? What is practical reason and what is the relation between rationality and morality? (Can the irrational person be moral, or the immoral person rational?) Does humanity have one telos, many, or none?  (Does beliefs about the immortality of the soul make a difference to morality?) \
\
The three main parts of the thesis reflect attempts to answer some of these questions. The notion that virtues are excellent character traits all humans *need*; the notion that all human beings especially need practical wisdom, which is single name for the excellence (or excellences) of practical reason; and the notion that such character traits partly (but not fully) constitute the realization of our natural human telos. As I shall argue, the desirability of developing virtues such as courage and practical wisdom depends neither on relative cultural values nor a dogmatic conception of human nature. Rather, everyone needs to become virtuous. The sense of 'need', of course, needs clarification. But I shall argue that the virtuous person is truly admirable as an exemplary expression of human nature as it is not merely in our concepts and cultures but in itself. \
\
Critics exploit one or more horns of a dilemma,[Cf. @hursthouse2013; @mauser2011ontological. Mauser describes the dilemma excellently in chapter 5.] questioning whether it is possible to construct a neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism that is both (a) actually *ethical*[@brown2005really concludes that neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism is really naturalistic but is less ethical (i.e., normative) than might be wished.] and (b)  actually *naturalistic*.[Cf. rehg2003conceptual. Rehg et. al., conclude that neo-Aristotelian naturalism is really ethical but not sufficiently naturalistic.] I contend an affirmative answer to both concerns and hope by the end, that this problem will come to light as both significant and tractable. I hope that some plausible picture will be painted of the relation of virtue to practical reason and happiness. \
\
\
\
### The Sources\
\
In the course of clarifying and defending these claims, I shall be obliged to take a stance on several active and lively debates among ethicists about virtue, practical reason, and human telos. Fundamentally, my arguments defend a sort of neo-Aristotelian naturalism.  For this reason, my arguments arise primarily through presenting, comparing, and critiquing the ethical views of three of the most prominent and influential neo-Aristotelian virtue ethicists: Philippa Foot, John McDowell, and Alasdair MacIntyre. \
\
### The Neo-Aristotelians \
\
I select my themes from the neo-Aristotelian virtue ethicists. In the next chapter, I shall explain and defend the neo-Aristotelian project in more detail. Here I should only like to introduce a list of who they are in general and who my main authors are. Who are they? Rosalind Hursthouse provides a list: Anscombe,[@anscombe1958; @anscombe1957intention] Geach,[@geach1977virtues and 1956] Foot,[@foot2001natural] McDowell,[@mcdowell1998mindvalue; @mcdowell1996mind] MacIntyre,[@macintyre1999dependent] Hursthouse,[@hursthouse1999] Nussbaum,[@nussbaum1995aristotle;  @nussbaum1988non; nussbaum1999virtue] Thompson.[@thompson1995representation] For my part, I add Annas[@annas2011intelligent] and Brown[@brown2008virtue]. These neo-Aristotelians are a group of contemporary (mostly analytic) philosophers who have written on a set of ethical questions that, as I shall elaborate in a later chapter, represent some of the most significant and interesting work being done in English speaking ethics. Several important and influential philosophers will remain in the background of my discussions, despite being equally significant names n virtue ethics from the last 100 years.^[They include @murdoch1998sovereignty; Bernard Williams; @swanton2003virtue; @slote1992morality; @bloomfield2003moral; Robert Adams, Gopal Sreenivasan, Rachana Kamtekar, Talbot Brewer, and R. Scott Smith. One could certainly construct a worthwhile project approaching all of (or a different sub-set of) these authors. Nevertheless, the smaller set of Neo-Aristotelians are my focus. Every project must cut off scope somewhere.] All of these writers (and their many followers and critics) have contributed to a remarkable movement in analytic ethics. While I do make an effort to engage or at least mention contributions from this broader set, I have limited my primary focus to MacIntyre, Foot, and McDowell. Not only does this limitation keep my scope realistic, but also it allows for a rich discussion of the illuminating comparisons and contrasts between their (often conflicting) views.\
\
### The Form\
\
Much has been written about MacIntyre, Foot, and McDowell's views of virtue, practical reason, and eudaimonia.^[@annas2011intelligent gives a concise and clear account of all three.] However, not enough has yet been do on the dynamic relation between these three concepts. All three of the above mentioned concepts are essential to developing a robust neo-Aristotelian naturalism. \
\
At the same time, all three concepts are, according to Hursthouse, likely to be misunderstood by modern philosophers.[@sepvirtue. \'93Three of virtue ethics' central concepts, virtue, practical wisdom and eudaimonia are often misunderstood. Once they are distinguished from related but distinct concepts peculiar to modern philosophy, various objections to virtue ethics can be better assessed.\'94] The project of this dissertation is not only to defend neo-Aristotelian accounts of each concept, but to show how, together, they constitute a formal schema that has a chance of becoming a fully adequate ethical theory.^[For example, McDowell, Foot, and MacIntyre can be seen using this schema @mcdowell1979virtue and @mcdowell1980role; @foot2002virtues and @foot2001natural; @macintyre1984after and @macintyre1999dependent] I will point out here just one justification for the three concept schema from Alasdair MacIntyre in *After Virtue*. There, he argues persuasively that necessary conditions of an intelligible moral system include:  (a) a conception of human nature -- including human rationality -- as it is prior to deep self-reflection or moral effort; (b) a conception of some human telos or end we ought to realize; and (c) a conception of the qualities or actions that enable a human being to achieve his or her telos. Simply put, a moral theory needs a starting point, an ending point, and (in tandem with those two points) a set of appropriate means to that end. \
\
### The Centrality of Teleology\
\
The plausible belief seems to be that one cannot leave for vacation without knowing (a) where that destination is, (b) where one is at the moment, and (c) the directions \'97 on foot, by car, or plane, or boat or what have you \'97  to the destination. Similarly, any attempt to construct a moral theory without all three components (human telos, human nature as practical reasoners, and virtue) is bound to stultify. \
\
Arguably, the unifying concept of the schema, arguably, is not virtue but telos. If we can't even create a shopping list of groceries we "should" buy without a clear conception of the dinner to be cooked, then *a fortiori* strict moral rules and virtues without any notion of the kind of life that is to be lived are bound to degenerate into a kind of pointless legalism. If natural human telos in particular is central to the project of virtue ethics, it would seem that developing a plausible modern virtue ethical theory would require rehabilitating a notion of natural teleology in general. \
\
### The Challenge of Teleology\
\
However, the desire to rehabilitate natural teleology may seem overly optimistic. The idea of teleology is a major stumbling block.[@ward2013against] One the one hand, supernatural teleology is felt by some to be too religious; on the other hand, natural teleology is commonly supposed to be somehow debunked by modern science. Francis Bacon and others intentionally excised "final causation" from natural science since they feared that empirical and theoretical investigation into final causes \'93defiled philosophy\'94.^[Cf. Bacon, New Organon, Book I. XLVIII \'93Although the most general principles in nature ought to be held merely positive, as they are discovered, and cannot with truth be referred to a cause, nevertheless the human understanding being unable to rest still seeks something prior in the order of nature. And then it is that in struggling toward that which is further off it falls back upon that which is nearer at hand, namely, on final causes, which have relation clearly to the nature of man rather than to the nature of the universe; and from this source have strangely defiled philosophy.\'94] If teleological virtue ethics is somehow distinctive of pre-modern traditions, wouldn't virtue talk be simply outmoded? Wouldn't any attempt to revive such talk be antiquarian and nostalgic? Is there a third alternative to \'93religious\'94 teleology and natural teleology? Or can one of these disjuncts be rehabilitated in order that teleology may serve its crucial purpose in ethics? \
\
The skeptical worries must be taken seriously and addressed in detail. The modern world is not the ancient world. Modern science, philosophy, and culture are not the same as their pre-modern counterparts. It is imperative that contemporary virtue ethicists pay due respect to what *has* changed. It is imperative that contemporary virtue ethicists clarify the relationship of their theories to modern science. \
\
Nevertheless, I think that the sort of realism about natural teleology requisite for neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics grounded on human nature is -- and can be shown to be -- perfectly respectable, modern, scientific, and naturalistic. I shall present the case for this optimistic conclusion in parts, first in a chapter on ethical naturalism and in a later chapter on telos itself. The conclusion I shall defend is a growing consensus that natural final causation is no more mysterious or magical than biological life, or consciousness, or rationality. And hence, the pursuit of virtues is no more obsolete than any other human activity, such as farming, or laughing, or studying astronomy. \
\
### Suspending Judgment about God\
\
For this project, I set to one side the possibility of supernatural teleology. I do not wish to *deny* the possibility that a divine mind is organizing things; nor do I wish to assume it at the outset. While the conclusion of my arguments is that the imperative to become virtuous -- to imitate the virtuous man or woman, to acquire virtues and grow intellectually -- are (if you like) natural laws, I remain agnostic as to whether these norms come from any particular personal god.^[Affirming the divinity of some norms is consonant with a variety of theistic views: Aristotle's god is neither Brahman nor Jehovah.]\
\
The first reason for suspending discussion of this possibility is simply considerations of space. I hope in future research to analyze the relationship between virtue theories and religion. \
\
The second reason is that there is no consensus among neo-Aristotelians regarding the supernatural; some are atheists, some Platonists, others Christians, still others a different sort of theist. Despite this variety, they hold a broad consensus about the possibility of *somehow* grounding an ethical theory in human nature.^[Historically, a survey of teleological realists would feature theists, atheists, humanists, pantheists, and so on.] The \'93somehow\'94 is my goal in this project. Virtue ethics has a long history, while metaphysical naturalism has only recently attained dominance. How far, if at all, can a metaphysical naturalist be a virtue ethicist? Some treat 'naturalist' as just another label for 'atheist.'[@plantinga2008evolution] Others treat naturalism as merely a method.[@goetz2008naturalism; @sepnaturalism] What are we to make of these distinctions? John McDowell is a \'93relaxed naturalist\'94 yet a critic of \'93scientism\'94. And Stephen R. Brown is more of a strict naturalist and concedes some normative ground, allowing that his ethics might amount to something more descriptive. \
\
The third reason is that natural teleology, if it can be defended, is *compatible with* the possibility of supernatural teleology even though it does not *necessitate* it. It is possible that God is directing all natural affairs to his purposes, including guiding human beings by commands; it is possible that the entire orchestral cosmos is organized around God as the *arche* and telos, and that (to paraphrase St. Augustine) \'93our hearts are restless until they rest in him\'94. However, for this project, I wish to see how far one\'92s ethical outlook can go while suspending judgment. \
\
\
\
\
\
### Why it matters\
\
Normative ethical theories purport to provide their adherents with direction on how to live. They describe or evaluate what to do and what not to do. They give reasons for what is worthwhile, what is perhaps neutral but a waste of time, and what is to be carefully avoided. \
\
Much of our modern ethics (with the possible exception of bioethics) has become so barren and impractical that it has lost sight of \'97 let alone connection to \'97 the day to day direction on how to live. Thankfully, a few vociferous critics (such as Elizabeth Anscombe) have shaken us out of our stupor. Bernard Williams has done as much as anyone to remind moral philosophers that questions of how to live are prior, and deeper, than questions of what is wrong. \'93Character ethics,\'94 rather than mere \'93quandary ethics\'94 is what is really needed in the vast majority of circumstances. That is not to say that moral quandaries are unimportant in life or unimportant in theory; quite the contrary, often times the moral quandary is the exceptional case that can provide a cutting counterexample to a nonsensical view. And moral dilemmas like those encountered in great works of fiction (*Othello*, *War and Peace*, *Gilead*) are real, if blessedly rare, occurrences in a normal human life. But for all this for ninety-nine parts of any given day I encounter very few temptations to do wrong; day by day and even hour by hour I encounter many competing or conflicting goods that seem worthwhile but cannot all be pursued. Check email or grade papers? Write more or spend more time with my kids? Pursue a teaching job in state or out of state? Invest in this friendship or spend much-needed time alone? A normative ethical theory, if it is not merely an abstract game of conceptual Jenga, ought to guide its adherent in reflecting upon such goods, weighing them in a cool and sober hour, and giving reasons for what to do. \
\
One further example: A former student once asked me how I decided to become a teacher. I once asked if former teacher, whether I should go to grad school. There are at least two kinds of questions like these regarding how to live one's life. The first question is the kind of question the reflects on what one is already doing, what. One already feels confident about. The second question is the kind of question that reflects on what one is about to do, what one feels unsure about. It is possible to feel confidence, but to inquire into the origin and justification of that confidence. There are at least two kinds of questions in philosophical ethics. \
\
The first is to inquire into great attitudes that we are confident are true, and useful guides in living in world life. The second is to inquire into difficult, and controversy or undecided questions. As an example of the first, the value of virtue ethics is, I believe, this type. As an example of the second, consider various questions in biomedical research and transhumanism. Can we ethically experiment on vertebrates? What, if any, are the limits on augmenting are natural abilities with technology? These are important questions *because* we may not be confident about the answers, or because there may be as yet no confident public consensus. The former questions, by contrast, are important because we are confident about the answer and because we have as of now a strong social consensus. \
\
So the first reason why this ethical discussion \'97 why any ethical discussion \'97 matters is, of course, that ethics is part of the business of living well. And living well is, perhaps by definition, the only thing worth doing. \
\
However, there are several more mundane and academic reasons this investigation is worthwhile.  For example, the ongoing debates in metaethics over moral naturalism concern whether and how far moral properties can be identified with natural properties. My thesis bears obvious relevance to these debates. \
\
Furthermore, although virtue ethics has made a recent comeback, virtue ethicists have not yet come to consensus on a definition of virtue let alone a definition of practical reason or eudaimonia. In my view, part of the cacophony is due to a failure to coordinate the two concepts in complete ethical system. \
\
Much to blame for the barrenness of a lot of modern ethical theorizing is our obsession with individual actions over whole lives. \
\
### Taking morality seriously \
\
Another recent thinker, David Enoch, has presented a persuasive argument that any alternative to a thoroughgoing moral realism, whatever its merits, doesn't account for or allow us to take morality sufficiently seriously -- as seriously as we already do, or as seriously as we must do \'97 especially for deliberation about what to do. Moral realism of the robust sort gains its plausibility from allowing or explaining why we take morality just so seriously -- as serious as life and death.[@enoch2011taking] \
\
I take these claims together to be an explanandum and explanans. There are many ways of trying to convince people to take morality less seriously, by showing it up, by exposing it, deflating it, showing what moral claims "really" amount to, and so on. Peter Railton claims that some people can take morality too seriously even though they are avowed subjectivists. He says: \
\
>Some may be drawn to, or repelled by, moral realism out of a sense that it is the view of ethics that best expresses high moral earnestness. Yet one can be serious about morality, even to a fault, without being a moral realist. Indeed, a possible objection to the sort of moral realism I will defend here is that it may not make morality serious enough.[@railton1986moralrealism 164]\
\
An objection Enoch might make (or that I shall make in the same spirit) is that there are two kinds of earnestness. One is an earnestness in doing good. The other is an inevitable earnestness in caring about what we do when we deliberate. Enoch emphasizes the second. Railton\'92s non-reductive but naturalistic morality may account for the fact that people sincerely and eagerly care about doing right but it doesn\'92t account for the way we in fact deliberate. \
\
Enoch summarizes his moral realism in this way: \
\
>I believe that there are irreducibly normative truths and facts, facts such that we should care about our future well-being, that we should not humiliate other people, that we should not reason and form beliefs in ways we know to be unreliable. These are, of course, just examples: even if I am wrong about them, I believe there must be some examples of this sort, examples of normative (and indeed moral) truths that are irreducibly normative, truths that are perfectly objective, universal, absolute. They are independent of us, our desires and our (or anyone else\'92s) will. And our thinking and talking about them amounts not just to an expression of any practical attitudes, but to a representation of these normative truths and facts. These normative truths are truths that, when successful in our normative inquiries, we discover rather than create or construct. They are, in other words, just as respectable as empirical or mathematical truths (at least, that is, according to scientific and mathematical realists).[@?]\
\
### Conclusion\
\
As difficult as it is to consider seriously the project of restoring teleology, final causality, natural purposiveness to its proper place, it can be done. And in order to defend an account of virtue as partly constitutive of our natural human telos, it *must* be done. Philosophers in the Aristotelian tradition are uniquely situated to do so. That tradition promises the resources with which to construct an ethical system including all three elements of the schema while rehabilitating a form of natural teleology that is not only tenable in light of modern beliefs, but rationally commends itself in light of all we now know.^[For Aristotle himself, humans were rational animals with a particular psychology and set of potentialities, including the endowment of divine nous; our species-wide telos was happiness or eudaimonia. A life of virtuous activity was the means to eudaimonia, and detailed information about the virtues -- both moral and intellectual -- were knowable from tradition and ratified or modified by reflecting on the lives of virtuous Athenian citizens. For neo-Aristotelians some aspects of Aristotle's three-fold system are correct as is, some need revising and updating, while others need throwing out.] \
\
\
\
### Chapter Outline\
\
In short, I shall defend my thesis by way of discussing the three mentioned themes in the recent neo-Aristotelians, especially MacIntyre, Foot, and McDowell. Some (though not all) of those defending a teleological conception of nature and ethics have been virtue ethicists. The argument will unfold in the following chapters.\
\
* Chapter 1. Virtue in Neo-Aristotelian Ethical Naturalism\
* Chapter 2. Virtues as Traits Necessary for Humans as Practical Reasoners\
* Chapter 3. Virtues as Excellent Character Traits\
* Chapter 4. Virtue as Excellence of Practical Reason\
* Chapter 5. Virtue as Realizing our Natural Human Telos\
* Chapter 6. Conclusions\
\
\
\
### Apologia\
\
Virtue, practical reason, and telos are age-old themes. Treating them adequately is far too grand a task for one dissertation. As Glaucon said to Socrates, "The measure of listening to such discussions is the whole of life."[@plato Republic 450b.] Nevertheless, they are significant themes. My hope is that even an unworthy treatment of a worthy topic will attain some value. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
#Virtue in Neo-Aristotelian Ethical Naturalism\
\
## Grounding Ethics\
\
### Methodology\
\
The neo-Aristotelians base their ethical theory on human nature. Where else can one begin when constructing an ethical theory? Julia Annas says there are roughly three camps: The first grounds ethics on religious or metaphysical theories. For example, most non-philosophers derive their *ethos* and way of life from religious or social tradition. Some philosophers do the same.  The second camp grounds ethics on non-natural properties; these philosophical theories might treat 'the good' as a sui generis, non-natural property. \
\
The third camp grounds ethics on theories of some aspect of nature. This would include a range of ethical theories like that of Richard Boyd, Peter Railton, Frank Jackson, or David Hume, which ground ethics in one's sentiments and natural sympathies, in human reason, in human contracts, in pleasure and pain, and so on. \
\
One can find virtue theories in each of these three camps. Indeed, some virtue ethical theories are based on religious or metaphysical theories (Christian ethics, Platonic ethics, etc.). Naturalistic virtue ethics tend to ground  ethics in human nature, conciously juxtaposing phrases like 'a good human' with 'a good plant' or 'a good deer.'\
\
**Methodological question:** How much evaluative truth can one learn (about virtues and vices, practical wisdom, etc.) by examining human nature, including our rationality and possibly our natural teleology? \
\
If we can infer some evaluative truths from some natural facts, then a case needs to be made for that general point. The facts of *the way we are* supply excellent (indeed, very often overriding) reason for *the way we ought to be*. And I shall argue that some evaluative judgments -- such as that 'virtues are beneficial for humans' and that 'wisdom is a virtue' -- true and can be known to be true by examining human nature, which is practical, rational animals. \
\
### Human nature as ground?\
\
The neo-Aristotelians base their ethical theory on human nature. This project may seem, on the face of it, hopeless. On the one hand, the notion of "human nature" seems to some a bit vague and mystical, like the notion of an essence or Platonic universal underlying all human beings. Bernard Williams summarizes the antiquated worldview that many moderns are suspicious of: "The idea of a naturalistic ethics was born of a deeply teleological outlook, and its best expression, in many ways, is still to be found in Aristotle's philosophy, a philosophy according to which there is inherent in each natural kind of thing an appropriate way for things of that kind to behave."[Cf. @williams1995making 109] In the absence of such a universal essence, 'human nature' seems to be an abstract concept by which we gesture at the "mess" of humanity, irrational and variable. In the absence of a "given" human nature, each of us must create our own nature, positing ourselves, defining our values, and charting our destiny. On the other hand, another group of naturalistic philosophers do suppose there is such thing as "human nature" but they believe it can only be known by examining our biological make up in connection with psychology and anthropology:  genetics, evolutionary history, physiology and neurophysiology, our geographical settings, social, anthropological customs, and so on. The problem is that *this* scientific conception of human nature has nothing obviously to do with *ethics*. Thus, Rosalind Hursthouse: "Ethical naturalism is not to be construed as the attempt to ground ethical evaluations in a scientific account of human nature; ethical evaluations are disanalogous to non\uc0\u8208 ethical ones in various ways. Both depend upon our identifying what is characteristic of the species in question."[@hursthouse1998, especially chapter 10]\
\
Relatedly, basing one's ethical theory on human nature is liable to quickly run afoul of Moore's so-called naturalistic fallacy. One cannot validly leap from descriptive statements such as "celebrities wear ties at the Oscars" to normative statements such as "celebrities ought to wear ties at the Oscars." Likewise, even if one the moral facts about good and bad or about virtues and vices could be shown to relate to descriptions something like "human nature", one could not validly derive normative conclusions from descriptive propositions. The relation between human nature and ethics would, in the end, support a general non-cognitivist expressivism about moral talk: we approve of things that are survival-inducing, say, or disapprove of things that dissolve social bonds.^[A fourth objection from a quite different quarter is the worry that human nature is corrupted by sin and ancestral guilt. On this objection, even though human nature exists and even though a good person would be an exemplary human being as such, none of us actual human beings are situated appropriately to identify what is good or to become good. Our moral efforts, our natural inclinations, and even the very intellect by which we engage in moral reflection are co-opted by a deep brokenness of the heart -- a depravity of spirit. All our natural inclinations and best efforts to arise above them are doomed from the start, which renders our moral efforts in need of outside assistance if they are to make any progress. This objection is a real one, but I must defer it, for two reasons: (1) Those readers of different theological positions or no theological position at all will not have this worry; (2) I hope to treat the relation of virtue ethics to religion in general in a later work which make this objection its main theme.]\
\
These objections are formidable, but responses can be made. They either rest on misunderstandings of the neo-Aristotelian project or else rest on legitimate limitations of philosophical ethics *tout court*. In the former case, all that is required to alleviate these worries is to clarify the project. In the latter case, what is required is to identify the legitimate limits of philosophical ethics, illuminate them, and show how much we may hope for within those limits. \
\
First, I shall offer some preliminary suggestions about possibility -- indeed the promise -- of grounding ethics in human nature. (Some of the initial arguments presented here will receive a more thorough treatment in a later chapter.) Secondly, I shall explain more about the neo-Aristotelian project in particular approaches this task. Thirdly, I shall offer a more rigorous argument for the fundamental premise that we can infer normative conclusions from natural, normative facts. \
\
\
## Initial Objections\
\
### Human nature is a mess? \
\
The first worry is that human nature is really a mess. Bernard Williams expresses the worry that human nature is an "ill-sorted bricolage of powers and instincts": \
\
>The second and more general reason lies not in the particular ways in which human beings may have evolved, but simply in the fact that they have evolved, and by natural selection. The idea of a naturalistic ethics was born of a deeply teleological outlook, and its best expression, in many ways, is still to be found in Aristotle's philosophy, a philosophy according to which there is inherent in each natural kind of thing an appropriate way for things of that kind to behave. On that view it must be the deepest desire\'97need?\'97purpose?\'97satisfaction?\'97of human beings to live in the way that is in this objective sense appropriate to them (the fact that modern words break up into these alternatives expresses the modern break\uc0\u8208 up of Aristotle's view). Other naturalistic views, Marxist and some which indeed call themselves \'91evolutionary\'92, have often proclaimed themselves free from any such picture, but it is basically very hard for them to avoid some appeal to an implicit teleology, an order in relation to which there could be an existence which would satisfy all the most basic human needs at once. The first and hardest lesson of Darwinism, that there is no such teleology at all, and that there is no orchestral score provided from anywhere according to which human beings have a special part to play, still has to find its way into ethical thought.[@williams2011ethics 44]\
\
The response of Hursthouse, Foot, Brown, and Nagel, is that natural teleology is indeed compatible with Darwinism and does indeed provide a "an appropriate way to behave" (or we might add, *ways*) that is "inherent in each natural kind of thing." Natural teleology is only incompatible with a teleological nihilism distinctive of (certain brands) of metaphysical reductionism.  Strictly speaking, evolutionary theory may be summarized in five theses explaining the current multiplicity and shape of terrestrial life.[Cf. @plantinga2011conflict 8-9. 1. The earth is very old; 2. Life has progressed from relatively simple to relatively complex forms; 3. Through slow and gradual changes, all the modern forms of live have appeared; 4. All of life originated from one original place and species; 5. Some mechanism such as natural selection drives the process of descent with modification. ] Each separately and all together they explain biological processes of genetic mutation, reproduction, preservation, and proliferation. A sixth, not *necessarily* related  Strictly speaking, about teleology, it says absolutely nothing.[Cf. @plantinga2011conflict 8-10. The sixth thesis, often appended to the first five, is that the process of natural selection is unguided. But regardless of its popularity among biologists this is, strictly speaking, a philosophical claim, not a biological one.] As for those brands of metaphysical reductionism that are incompatible with natural teleology, if our knowledge of natural teleology is well-grounded enough then so much the worse for metaphysical reductionism. \
\
While Hursthouse is quick to assure the reader that her goal is not the production of a "scientific" ethics, by this she means only that ethical evaluations cannot be made from "outside" the ethical outlook itself: ethics is not to become a branch of biology. She emphatically *does* mean to make evaluations of human beings can be made in a way analogous to the way we evaluate cacti or deer. \
\
In each case we rely on the notion of natural kinds and their appropriate way of behaving:\
\
>in relation to which they are evaluated as good or defective. The evaluations do not\'97as they might in a post\uc0\u8208 Darwinian age\'97evaluate members of species of living things simply as good, or not so good, or downright defective, as replicators of their genes.[@hursthouse1998virtue 257-8]\
\
Hursthouse's primary response to Williams is that his worry is not actually rooted in the progress of modern science. He himself admits that "many of course have come to that conclusion before" (the conclusion that "human beings are to some degree a mess... for whom no form of life is likely to prove entirely satisfactory, either individually or socially.")[@hursthouse1998virtue 261, quoting from @williams1995making.] Rather, Hursthouse points out, his worry is an expression of moral nihilism and despair.^[I shall take up the topic of rational despair again in a later chapter.] Williams believes human nature is a mess *because* he believes no form of life is completely satisfactory for everyone. But that blade cuts the other way. If one has hope that some form of life is or may be at least mostly satisfactory for at least some people, it makes sense to believe human nature is not completely a mess. And Hursthouse movingly praises hope as a virtue.\
\
>Alternatively (or perhaps as well) we could stick with what we have\'97those facts about human nature and the way human life goes that support the claim that the virtues on the standard list benefit their possessor, and the reading of human history that ascribes our persisting failure to achieve *eudaimonia* in anything but very small patches to our vices. True, it is not easy to hold on to them sometimes; despair and misanthropy are temptations. But we should.[@hursthouse1998virtue 265]\
\
I should not like to deny that human society and many, many human individuals are "a mess" in the sense that corruption is a real feature of human life. A selected list of the dark side of our species: War, oppression, disease, genetic defect, injury, hatred, vice, a large and growing list of different kinds of injustice. These, also, are empirical facts of anthropology and psychology. I should not like to deny that *things are bad*. I should only like to make space for the possibility that things *are not all bad*. The universal optimist is obliged unrealistically to deny all the dark side of our existence. But the universal pessimist is obliged unrealistically to deny all the light side: peace and freedom, glowing health, genetic order, beauty that persists into old age, love, virtue, and the halting but admirable efforts toward justice and social harmony. \
\
Below I shall make the case that ethical conclusions can be derived from natural facts about human beings. Here I only wish to make room for the possibility that our data set of such facts cannot with integrity include all light and sweetness nor all dank and dark cynicism. \
\
### Human nature is merely a biological concept\
\
As for the second worry, some will say that humans are mere mammals, and that is the end of it. Stephen Brown argues that ethics is a descriptive discipline in the end; even virtue ethics, after being appropriately "naturalized", does not *commend* the virtues so much as *detail* the traits which happen to be adaptive for creatures like us to survive and propogate our genotype.[@brown2008virtue; @brown2005really] Although the "characteristic form of life" of human beings involves highly rarified neurological and cognitive processes we do not observe in other animals, nevertheless, nature only reveals one kind of biological concept of nature: a species. And species aim to survive and reproduce. \
\
My reply is that to say that humans are mammals is an empirical assertion; we exhibit quite a sufficient number of tell-tale properties shared by other mammals: a neocortex, hair, mammary glands, and hearts of a particular form and function.\
\
But to say that humans are *merely* mammals is a profoundly anti-empirical assertion. I even would tendentiously label it profoundly *anti-scientific*. For what we observe of ourselves both "from inside" and "from outside" we exhibit a range of properties not shared by other mammals: grammar and language, fire-making, cooking, sex for pleasure, abstract reasoning, science, philosophy, religion, mythology, agriculture. Of course, slippery spatial analogies like "inside" and "outside" admit of multiple senses: "inside" can and often does mean what can be known via introspection (e.g., the way I know what it feels like to be slighted or to be praised, the way I remember the color of my grandmother's house) and what can be known from accepting limitations of a first-personal or second-personal human point of view more generally (e.g., it appears that the sun orbits the earth rather than the other way around; and I know when my mother is upset because I just "know" that look). Looking at things from the "outside" might mean what can be known via sensory perception or what can be known -- if anything -- by pretending to a neutral, objective, third-person, God's eye view.^[Whether we can know anything outside of time and space (such as platonic universals) is of course a large question I don't wish to enter into here.] We can posit counterfactuals, as for example when we speculate what intelligent extraterrestrials would think of humans if they observed and studied our species, with fresh eyes, alongside every other. All that matters for my purposes now is that our species exhibits a range of peculiar activities that distinguish us from mammals, from animals more broadly, and from any other known natural entity in the cosmos -- and that recognizing as much is an *empirical* matter. To deny our uniqueness is possible, after a long inquiry. But to be blind to our uniqueness from the outset is to be subject, in all likelihood, to philistene reductionism that has no more to do with genuine science than does belief in extraterrestrial life.\
\
In a subsequent chapter, I shall attempt to say more about what human nature consists in (spoiler alert: it is our set of rational capacities). My only concern right now is to make space for the plausible notion that the concept of human nature is not easily reduced to the concept of "just another earth-born, carbon-based mammal."\
\
### Human nature is on one side of the Is-Ought Gap\
\
As for the third concern, the is-ought or fact-value gap can be overcome by discovering natural teleological facts from which we can derive ethical or normative conclusions. As Stephen Brown puts it, "Human beings are a species of social animal for which there is a characteristic way of life. An individual human being may be evaluted as good or bad according to how well that individual realizes the human way of life."[@brown2008virtue 1] To get here, Brown argues simply that "there is teleology in nature." And he is right. \
\
That there is teleology in nature -- enough, at least, to ground an ethics of human nature -- is the case I shall make for the remainder of this chapter. Before I get to that case, I shall give a bit of historical context for the revival of humanistic ethics.\
\
## The Neo-Aristotelian Project\
\
### The revival of virtue ethics\
\
Virtue talk, once a normal part of western cultural and intellectual life, largely faded during (roughly) the last three centuries. Its resurgence in the last 60 years has been well documented. Today, about one fifth of analytic philosophers self-identify as adhering to "virtue ethics".[@chalmers2014philosophers] Not everyone is impressed, of course, with the alleged benefits of virtue ethics; not everyone agrees that "virtue ethics" is a valid category anyhow.[@nussbaum1999virtue. Nussbaum argues that we should talk less about virtue ethicists and more about neo-Humeans, neo-Kantians, neo-Aristotelians; and talk more still about their substantive views about the role of reason in morality, the role of emotions and desires and other sub-rational psychological phenomena, and their moral views.] Nevertheless, this figure is remarkably high, given the notorious difficulty of achieving ethical and metaethical consensus and given the long dominance, in academic philosophy at least, of Kantian and Utilitarian theories of morality (to say nothing of the various brands of moral skepticism). \
\
Howe are we to explain the resurgence of virtue talk? One interpretation is that something is profoundly wrong with modern moral philosophy. Perhaps it was disastrously wrong for Enlightenment and post-Enlightenment thinkers to turn away from tradition, from religion, from the messy realities of human life in an attempt to construct a universal, abstract, Apollonian, rational theory of morality. On this interpretation, the flexibility of Aristotle and the humanism of Confucius provide a refreshing alternative to the stolid rationalism of Kant or Mill. ^[This interpretation, of course, is a substantive moral thesis couched in the language of a historical thesis. So it is debatable whether this story is even true *as history*. I shall try to remain neutral about the history and discuss the substantive theory.] \
\
Rosalind Hursthouse disputes this interpretation. She thinks virtue ethicists presented their views as *rivals* to the dominant moral theories only because, in the early days, it needed to fight for a position at the table. Now that virtue ethics has a respectable place in our taxonomy of philosophical ethics, such rivalry is needlessly combative. \
\
The second interpretation (which Hursthouse seems to favor) is that virtue talk can and does enrich Kantian and Utilitarian or more broadly consequentialist ethical theories. As Rosalind Hursthouse expresses this view: "On this assumption, \'91virtue ethics\'92 so-called does not figure as a normative rival to utilitarian and deontological ethics; rather, its (fairly) recent revival is seen as having served the useful purpose of reminding moral philosophers that the elaboration of a normative theory may fall short of giving a full account of our moral life."[@hursthouse1996normative] Kant himself had a theory of virtue. Julia Driver, Ben Bradley and others have been working to articulate a theory they call \'93virtue consequentialism\'94 or \'93character consequentialism\'94. In contrast to \'93act\'94 or \'93rule\'94 utilitarianisms, virtue consequentialism describes virtues as those traits whose possessors tend to bring about the most desirable consequences. Virtue concepts such as temperance and justice are both potent and flexible. They are potent enough to supply resources concepts of duty or pleasure cannot supply on their own; yet they are flexible enough to accommodate varying substantive views of what justice is and why it is morally admirable. Certainly, one useful way of distinguishing (say) the ethical theories of Elizabeth Anscombe and Christine Korsgaard would be to point out that Anscombe makes heavier use of the term 'virtue' while Korsgaard makes heavier use of the term 'duty' or 'imperative'; but their theories can be distinguished in more useful detail by contrasting (say) Anscombe's emphasis on the need for moral psychology and a theory of action with Korsgaard's argument that the need to be moral arises out of our reflective, practical identity.\
\
My own view is that Elizabeth Anscombe, Bernard Williams, Alasdair MacIntyre, Iris Murdoch and others have indeed corrected certain myopic tendencies of modern morality. Martha Nussbaum argues that "virtue ethics" is a misleading category, but that there are three features of \'93common ground\'94 between those ethicists who talk about virtue including Kant and Mill and Sidgwick. Her three features are the notions that moral philosophy is (a) about the agent (not just individual choices or actions), (b) about motives, emotions, and settled character traits, and (c) the whole of life.[@nussbaum1999virtue 170] \'93Even though a concern for motive, intention, character, and the whole course of life was not in principle alien to Kantian and Utilitarian philosophy, it was certainly alien to most British and American Kantians and Utilitarians of the period.\'94[@nussbaum1999virtue 173] Martha Nussbaum argues that the \'93common ground\'94 between even diverging views is that we cannot construct a complete ethical theory by discussing only \'93isolated moments of choice\'94[@nussbaum1999virtue 174] \
\
So Anscombe et. al., have reminded us that the first question of philosophical ethics is "How am I to live?" This question is not an optional one for normal, reflective, adults. This question is not an avoidable one for those who face major problems in life. We need to refocus our arguments in philosophical ethics from looking just at individual choices or actions (viewed from the outside, like a moral critic) to looking at the whole of life (viewed from the inside, like a moral agent). \
\
A second myopic tendency whose correction helps explain the resurgance of virtue talk is the re-introduction of historical consciousness into philosophical ethics. Many of the neo-Aristotelians studied classics or history in addition to (or prior to) ethics. Long familiarity with cultures, places, and times other than one's own has a salubrious effect of helping one to see one's own culture and time. (I remember, after my first visit to Mongolia, whose capital city has only one department store, coming back to California and marvelling at Wal-Mart.) Likewise, philosophers who have spent long hours conversing with Aristotle or Aquinas are likely to notice more easily the assumptions, biases, strengths, and weaknesses of our own modern context. Jack Weinstein observes that Alasdair Macintyre did for ethics what John Rawls did for political philosophy: where Rawls re-invigorated political philosophy, \'93inaugurating the dominance of late twentieth-century liberalism\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 38], MacIntyre helped to re-invigorate analytic ethical philosophy (especially the ascendancy of late twentieth-century virtue ethics) by freshly examining ethical concepts in light of history.[@weinstein2003macintyre chapter 4.] MacIntyre argues that we can only responsibly use and evaluate practical concepts such as self, practice, telos, or virtue when we know our own history. Since *we ourselves*  inhabit a tradition, we must know ourselves *as* inhabitants of a tradition with a past. We will return to these themes in later chapters. \
\
A third myopic tendency is, as I have suggested above, the tendency to view morality as *either* a set of rules to be followed for their own sake (with no external "point" or purpose) or else a groundless social convention. One could use this disjunction to exhaustively plot many of the moral theories of the last century. Controversies play and re-play the tug-of-war between those who think these moral rules ought to be followed (no matter what!) and those who think these moral rules can be safely ignored. If morality is one piece of a three-part form (mentioned above), then it is possible to see moral rules as neither arbitrary impositions nor bolts of lightning from a clear sky. \
\
Although Aristotle and others viewed morality in this way, that is not to say that the three-part schematic is *anti-modern* or intrinsically *pre-modern*. For Aristotle himself, humans were rational animals with a particular psychology and set of potentialities, including the endowment of divine nous; our species-wide telos was happiness or eudaimonia. A life of virtuous activity was the means to eudaimonia, and detailed information about the virtues -- both moral and intellectual -- were knowable from tradition and ratified or modified by reflecting on the lives of virtuous Athenian citizens. But the message of the neo-Aristotelians is that we can pick and choose from Aristotle, discarding the bad but saving the good. And the good worth saving is quite a lot. It is not a foregone conclusion that contemporary virtue ethicist will *reject* widespread modern assumptions. Some, such as Murdoch and MacIntyre, did become staunch opponents of certain aspects of modernity. Others, such as McDowell and Hursthouse, become staunch defenders, even while working to enrich modernity with pre-modern tradition. \
\
To simplify matters quite a bit, we might say that modern science meant turn away from the human toward the cosmic and natural while ethics (and politics) was a turn toward the human -- often to the exclusion of the cosmic and natural. While each turn had its merits, each was likewise subject to excess.  The resurgence of virtue talk can be explained in part, I think, by a desire (within ethics and elsewhere) to correct both of these excesses at once. \
\
The metaphysical picture that is either assumed or entailed as part of the these neo-Aristotelian virtue ethicists' project similarly aims to avoid dualisms. It aims, rather, at a holistic picture of nature that includes humans and all living things within the cosmos and includes all parts of a human being (reason, emotion, desire, etc.). As Atkins eloquently puts it: \'93Anglo-American moral philosophy [has moved] beyond the limitations not only of A.J. Ayer and C.L. Stevenson, but also of Hume\'92s focus on sentiment, on the one hand, and Kant\'92s focus on reason on the other. Contemporary ethics is about the whole human being, seen as biological, social and cultural, emotional and reflective.\'94[@atkins2005morality]\
\
What exactly is this picture of the cosmos? Affirming a picture leads to difficulties; it is easier to deny the dualism. It rejects eliminative materialism which squashes all consciousness into the *merely* physical as well as rejecting panpsychism or idealism which sublimate all biological and physical things into consciousness. It aims to allow that both mind and matter are on a single continuum of fundamental reality.^[In this way, I take my brand of rationalistic naturalism to akin to "neutral monism". As Bertrand Russell explains it: "The view that seems to me to reconcile the materialistic tendency of psychology with the anti-materialistic tendency of physics is the view of William James and the American New Realists, according to which the \'93stuff\'94 of the world is neither mental nor material, but a \'93neutral stuff,\'94 out of which both are constructed." (Russell 1921, 6 % add in text).] I do not wish to enter a discussion of Russell's brand of neutral monism here; I simply use it as an example of a denial of dualism. If *something like* neutral monism is true, the imagination ignites. What would it be like to include the "human sciences" (*wissenschaft*) within science and to include the natural and cosmic in our politics and ethics? The neo-Aristotelian answer is that such an ethics would have to begin with an examination of human nature. In this way, it is much easier to see why neo-Aristotelians categorize themselves  under the metaethical banner of "ethical naturalism", even though they reject naturalism's more aggressive reductionism.\
\
### Is neo-Aristotelian naturalism... naturalistic? \
\
This point of philosophical taxonomy surfaces a problem. It is worthwhile to explain a problem with the neo-Aristotelian project here. To see it, consider the way James Lenman summarizes neo-Aristotelianism as a version of "moral naturalism":\
\
>One important school of thought ... [is] work is inspired by that of Aristotle. This view has its roots in the writings of G. E. M. Anscombe, P. T. Geach and the early Philippa Foot among others. Its contemporary representatives include the later Foot, Rosalind Hursthouse, Martha Nussbaum and Judith Jarvis Thomson. As this list makes clear, this is very much the official metaethical theory of the main current in contemporary virtue ethics. [@sepmoralnaturalism. Lenman acknowledges that Thomson might need to be subtracted from this list and that John McDowell might need to be added.]\
\
Lenman does not quite know what to do with neo-Aristotelian naturalism. (And he is not alone in that.)\
\
Two important metaphilosophical confusions lurking behind these innocuous distinctions. The first confusion is the close tie between neo-Aristotelian naturalism and virtue theory, which seems to blur the line between ethics and metaethics. Lenman seems bemused when he says that neo-Aristotelianism "the official metaethical theory of the main current in contemporary virtue ethics."  For when Foot, Hursthouse, McDowell are classified as virtue ethicists (a normative theory) *and* neo-Aristotelians (a metaethical theory), we might object. Aren't these two different projects? \
\
One legacy of G.E. Moore's *Principia Ethica* has been the tendency to sharply distinguish primary ethical questions (about what things are good) from metaethical questions (about what 'good' as an evaluative predicate *means*). Of course, the questions that concern modern metaethicists were posed and discussed by prior thinkers. However, the *Principia* gave a distinctive form to these questions and suggested a distinctive range of possible answers. Moore argued that all previous ethical philosophers had failed to resolve their disputes for a failure to define their terms. The question of what the word \'91good\'92 *means* (and, possibly the same question, what \'91good\'92 *refers to*) is distinct from the question *which things are good?* The first question is a conceptual question that aims to define a category. The second question is a substantive or existential question that aims to bring other concepts within that category. Moore argued (or according to some critics, *assumed*) that \'91goodness\'92 was indefinable.[@frankena1939naturalistic] That is, the good could not be defined in terms of any other property. It is false that \'91goodness is pleasure\'92  or \'91goodness is whatever is most real\'92. That we pursue pleasure is a psychological claim, not an ethical one; that we judge something to be real is a metaphysical claim, not an ethical one. \
\
If the good is indefinable, then any attempt to define it is going to fail. Any attempt to reduce the concept to a concept of lesser intension, or to translate it it as a concept, commits the \'93naturalistic fallacy.\'94 Moore is clear that the naturalistic fallacy isn\'92t *just* the error of defining the good as a natural property (such as the pleasant) but also the error of defining the good as a metaphysical or supernatural property (such as the Really Real, or the Divinely-Ordained). \
\
The neo-Aristotelians are pretty universally critical of Moore's arguments here. Philippa Foot and others dispute his starting points, as we shall see.[@foot2001natural chapter 1, "A Fresh Start?"] So the first reply to Lenman as to whether normative ethics and metaethics are two different projects is that they are not *necessarily* the same project. One's choice of philosophical taxonomy will reflect one's substantive views about ethics. As Alan Gibbard says:\
\
>Moore stressed the distinction in ethics between questions of meaning and questions of substance, and thereby gave rise to a tradition in analytic philosophy of separating the two parts of ethical theory: the metatheory and the substantive, normative part. Some philosophers have rejected the distinction; some Kantians, for instance, think that if you get the metatheory right, substantive ethical conclusions fall out as some kind of consequence, so that metaethics and substantive ethics are not really separate. Then too, anyone who rejects Sidgwick's and Moore's indefinability claim and thinks that ethical terms can be given analytic, naturalistic definitions thinks that the two putative subdivisions are not really separate. Those who reject any systematic distinction between questions of meaning and questions of substance might likewise reject a sharp, separate subject of metaethics.[@gibbard2003normative 320]\
\
Furthermore, even philosophers who maintain that ethics and metaethics are separate projects betray conspicuous connections between their first-order ethical and second-order metaethical views. For example, notice that supposedly "neutral" metaethics is often allied with first-order consequentialism: G.E. Moore, J.L. Mackie, Frank Jackson, Richard Boyd, Peter Railton, Simon Blackburn, and Alan Gibbard all endorse consequentialism. (We might even echo Lenman and call moral naturalism the "official theory of a main current in contemporary consequentialism.") Furthermore, even if a procedural, non-substantive approach to metaethics can be made neutral with respect to normative ethics, it is still admirably ambitious to construct a theory that pays attention to both. Darwall agrees. He summarizes the history of analytic ethics since Moore, and persuasively argues "that although metaethics and normative ethics are properly focused on different issues, they need to be brought into dynamic relation with one another in order to produce a systematic and defensible philosophical ethics. This mutual dependence is owing to the fact that issues of normativity are at the center of the concerns of both metaethics and normative ethics."[@darwall2003should] \
\
In sum, the answer to Lenman's first confusion is that the ethical and metaethical dimensions of neo-Aristotelianism are inseparable. My thesis is squarely and ethical argument concerning what character traits are worth pursuing (e.g, intelletual and moral virtues) and what traits count as virtues (e.g., practical wisdom). However, an adequate defense of my thesis requires me to assess more broadly metaethical considerations such as  status of human beings as normative creatures who evaluate themselves and others and who reflect upon what they have reason to do or to abstain from doing.\
\
## Naturalism\
\
\
Lenman's second confusion is an uncertainty with respect to who actually deserves the title of "naturalists". Lenman is not sure who counts, pointing out in a footnote that Thomson probably shouldn't be on this list and that John McDowell probably should. He says "McDowell is certainly pervasively inspired by Aristotle and he describes himself as a naturalist. See especially his 1995. But I suspect many philosophers would find his use of the term  'naturalist' here somewhat Pickwickian."[@sepmoralnaturalism]  The confusion arises because Lenman and others[@rehg2003conceptual; @hacker2009natural; @hacker2009human] are not sure that neo-Aristotelian "naturalism" is "really *naturalism*" at all. \
\
If it is naturalism, does that entail that happiness is simply a natural state, like health or pleasure? And if so, are the means to that end discernible through statistical analysis of causal relations between acts and their consequences? If it is not naturalism, then why talk about the facts human nature at all? \
\
Is there anything to this criticism? Since \'91naturalism\'92 is a term that demands definition by stipulation, we do well to translate it into other terms that are accurate to the author\'92s sense but (hopefully) more clear. \
\
### What is nature? \
The fault line here separates two contrary ways of understanding what *nature* is. \
\
### Naturalism is a useless word\
\
It is becoming more plain to anyone who reads the latest literature on "naturalism" that accusations from one philosopher to another that a theory fails to be "naturalistic" are vacuous. \
\
The noun 'Naturalism,' like the adjective, 'natural', is a cognate of 'nature.' Naturalism is an 'ism' attached to the most ambiguous word in our language: nature. But what is 'nature'? To say that various thinkers and various schools of thought defend non-identical definitions of nature would be an understatement. Various thinkers defend incompatible definitions. \
\
There are, by my count, no less than sixteen substantive philosophical positions that fly under the heading of 'naturalism', and they couldn't be more different: from Paul and Patricia Churchland's monistic physicalism, to John McDowell's "relaxed naturalism", to William James' neutral monism, to Thomas Aquinas' natural law theory, to Stoic pantheism, and more. Is there any question that these views are not just different but incompatible?  \
\
Consider an example to see how the competing understandings of nature render discussion about whether "x is really naturalistic" almost meaningless. \
\
Suppose Bob thinks 'nature' is simply another word for the concept of 'all that which is', all of reality, being. Nature is everything. His colleague Bettie thinks 'nature' is a word that picks out something special, namely that part of 'all that is' that is cosmic, that part of reality that constitutes *this* world. For Bob, nature is being. For Bettie, nature is part of being. \
\
In a discussion one day, Bob says, "You know, Bettie, I attended a lecture on angels yesterday. Being a naturalist, I was interested in the nature of angels. I believe some real beings are not physical beings but intellectual or spiritual beings -- but what is their nature? The lecturer argued that they are intellectual substances or disembodied minds. I found that compelling." Bettie replies,  "I certainly agree that some real beings are not physical beings but intellectual or spiritual beings. But being a naturalist, I would not say angels have a 'nature' or any 'natural properties' since they are not physical. Rather, angels have an essence." \
\
Is there any question that a hard-nosed physicalist such as Frank Jackson or Alan Gibbard would have an aneurysm listening to this conversation? \
\
Their colleague, Charlie, agrees with Bob in thinking 'nature' is simply another word for the concept of 'all that which is', all of reality, being -- but he is a materialist.[^20] Naturally enough, he thinks "because I am a naturalist, I do not think angels are real beings and part of the global world order, since they are not physical. I probably would not attend a lecture on angels in the first place." Charlie might look cross-eyed at Bob and Bettie during their exchange; Bob and Bettie might look cross-eyed at him back. \
\
Bob accuses Charlie of being a non-naturalist. Why? Because Charlie denies part of reality. A true naturalist accepts all of reality, whether material or not. Charlie is a dogmatist about denying fairies, demons, gods, angels, ghosts, and any other purported being that has the gall not to be material; Bob is more ecumenical and can examine the evidence for each purported being as it comes. \
\
[^20]: I say "materialist" and not "physicalist" because "physis" is Greek for "nature" and so the problem iterates.\
\
The point of these dialogues is this: The title 'naturalist' can, without contradiction, be claimed by Bob, Bettie, and Charlie. Each with a straight face owns the title, defends it against rivals, and criticizes the silly notions of their colleagues as "non-naturalistic." Bob is a non-naturalist to Bettie and Charlie because he thinks immaterial angels are part of nature, are members of the natural order. Bettie is a non-naturalist to Charlie because she thinks that angels exist above and beyond the material order. Charlie is a a non-naturalist to Bob because Charlie does not accept *all* of nature. \
\
This problem is iterative. It does no good to call Charlie a "physicalist" -- the term "physis" means "nature" so 'physicalist' is a Greek language version of the Latin language 'naturalist.' The question is whether angels have a *physis*. \
\
If the label is universally applicable, it is useless in the attempt to construct clear arguments with clear propositions. If it is useless for such purposes, it is *a fortiriori* pointless to use the term as an epithet of praise or blame. Yet despite this general conceptual anarchy, some philosophers emit the accusation of 'naturalism' or 'non-naturalism' as if uttering a curse. They seem to believe the sheer force of being called a naturalist or non-naturalist will melt their opponent's resolve and refute their position.\
\
I should say that among the crew of naturalists like myself, it is perfectly well to point out that "that fellow over there is not a naturalist like us" -- as long as we can recognize that that fellow and his crew are pointing to me and saying "that fellow over there is not a naturalist like us." Our disagreement is real. But it is over what 'nature' consists in and not whether some view ought to be taxonomized in philosophy encyclopedias as a 'naturalistic' view or not. I cannot imagine any philosophical view whatsoever -- pansychism, Parmenidean monism, nihilism -- that cannot be presented (without contradiction) as a variety of naturalism. \
\
So what question should we ask about view X? We should ask what *kind* of naturalism X is. But this is the same as asking whether it is true or false. And that is a worthwhile question. \
\
### Three alternatives to natural normativity (if not included elsewhere)\
\
1. **Nature is purely descriptive.** Bald nature is a realm of pure, descriptive fact.^[John McDowell calls this kind of naturalism \'91neo-Humean naturalism\'92 (*Mind, Values, Reality*, 183, 194) or \'91empiricistic naturalism\'92, \'91bald naturalism\'92,  \'91naturalism of the realm of law\'92 or \'91naturalism of disenchanted nature\'92.] The problem with this picture is that human beings would not be natural. The other side of the same coin is the view that normativity, whatever it is, is not natural.[@shafer2003moralrealism offers an argument that moral properties are "non-natural" in that they can be known without empirical help, but "natural" in that they are perhaps always realized in the physical, natural world.] But then again, human beings would not be natural if we are in any sense irreducibly normative. For normativity is central to human consciousness and value, and perhaps even language and meaning. As Julia Annas puts it: "Non-naturalistic accounts of ethical terms assume that their function, prominently their normativity, is something that arises with humans, or is produced by humans, in a way which owes nothing to the nature which we share with other living things."[@annas2005virtue 12] If nature cannot include irreducible normativity such as that which is essential to language and morality, surprisingly, it cannot include us. I think we ought to reject any picture of nature or of science that exiles naturalists and scientists. \
\
3. **Normativity actually descriptive.** Some zealous defenders of bald nature will be quick to assure me that normativity can and will be one day "reduced" to mere description. Beside the fact that such promises in philosophy of mind have been very long in the fulfilling, I think such assurances are especially misguided in this case. Telling me that normativity is, after all, *really* just descriptivity disguised or mistaken seems to me self-referentially incoherent. It is like arguing that one 'ought' not tell anyone what they 'ought to do.' Of course, arguing that one 'ought not' talk like that is an instance of telling me what I *ought* to do. Similarly, arguing that on best evidence everyone *ought* to believe that normativity is in principle reducible is an instance of appealing to fundamental, irreducible normative considerations about evidence and reasons for belief. To quote Annas again: "it strikes me as ironical that such accounts often arise... From an excessive respect for science. Not only do they cut off our self understanding from the understanding we have of other things, they prevent us from seeing continuities between us and other living things, and in both these ways reveal themselves as profoundly anti-scientific."[@annas2005virtue 13] Some may choose to wait (perhaps forever) for the promised reductions of the normative to the non-normative. I elect to move on. \
\
4. **Nature is unknown**. A final alternative, this one more desparate, would be to argue that nature is mysterious and that we cannot know the truth of generic statements. But, such a skeptical move renders us safe from natural normativity but at the cost of endorsing absurdity: isn't it scientific knowledge that penguins are birds, that eyes are adapted for seeing? I'm not sure how to debate someone who seriously would deny such statements. \
\
### Fink on Nature\
\
### Fact / value\
\
Put differently, the fault line separates two ways of understanding the fact/value dichotomy.[@putnam2002collapse] The assumption of Lenman (and others) is that nature is purely descriptive, with no "ought". But Aristotle and the broad Aristotelian tradition deny that the fact-value dichotomy is absolute. They conceive of *nature* as including everything that *is and ought to be.*^[As I understand it, the paradoxical notion of "what really is what ought to be" is a good way of summarizing the notion of natural law.] Briefly, for Moore nature as including everything that *is* but not what ought to be -- all facts, no values. Moore and those influenced by him, both naturalists and non-naturalists, have agreed with the underlying assumption that "nature" is purely descriptive. But what if this assumption is mistaken? Surely we cannot let a deeply-held assumption stand without scrutiny. For Aristotle, nature is some facts, some values. So norms and prescriptions can be just as natural as facts and descriptions. If normativity (*what ought to be*) is natural too, then it might be possible that *human nature* grounds ethical facts. And this is just what virtue ethics says. \
\
\
We have to consider the hypothesis: what if metaphysical and biology facts are just as natural as some ethical facts? What if the fact/value dichotomy is not absolute and inviolable? Then there might be a tight fit -- perhaps an inextricable tie -- between Aristotelian virtue theory and the metaethical view labeled neo-Aristotelian naturalism. And neo-Aristotelian naturalists argue that nature is or can be normative. \
\
\
Now, those who think the fact/value dichotomy really is most accurate may squirm at this hypothesis. They might just double down and insist that metaethical theory is utterly procedural and not substantive -- they might insist that it is utterly neutral with respect to normative ethical theories. Certainly this is a widespread belief. I shall try to make the case below.  \
\
Annas distinguishes two sorts of naturalism, one that emphasizes the biological nature of humanity (at the expense of the odd normativity of reason) and another that emphasizes the rational nature of humanity (at the expense of the mundane descriptivity of biology).[Annas, "Virtue Ethics: What Kind of Naturalism?" in @gardiner2005virtue] Christopher Toner distinguishes between the \'93biological naturalism\'94 of Thompson and Foot (and Hursthouse) on the one hand from the \'93second naturalism\'94 or \'93excellence naturalism\'94 or \'91culturalism\'92 of McDowell and MacIntyre, each of which has its strengths and problems. \
\
For my part, I shall assume that 'nature' or 'natural' refer to familiar objects and properties that exist in the cosmos today: people, stars, trees, penguins, bacteria, and their properties, like 'being an animal', 'bright,' 'green', 'being countershaded for camouflage,' and so on. I take my thesis that nature is normative to be *naturalistic* in the broad sense: I propose to use only philosophical and scientific methods to observe and explain natural phenomena; I bracket divine revelation or the existence of supernatural beings; and I warmly welcome the unrestricted definition of nature as *all there is*[Cf. @fink for for the best discussion I know of on all the many (many!) varieties of the word 'nature' as it occurs in philosophy.] and hence that humans are continuous with nature.[@brown2008virtue 1-2] By 'normative' I mean what involves statements not only descriptive judgments of what is but judgments about what *ought to be* or *ought not to be*. As Alan Gibbard says: \
\
>[P]art of what's special about morality is that it operates in the \'91space of reasons;\'92 it concerns justification and oughts. The term \'91normative\'92 is central to much current philosophical discussion. There's no agreement on what this technical term in our discipline is to mean, but it involves, in a phrase drawn from Sellars, being somehow \'91fraught with ought\'92.[@gibbard2003normative 321]\
\
### The Primacy of \'91Ought\'92 Over Is\
\
The fundamental problem with the prevailing brand of metaphysical naturalism is that it believes that facts are ultimately descriptive. When it runs into various kinds of normative or prescriptive facts, it short circuits. Naturalism can neither deny, nor eliminate, nor reduce normativity. \
\
The fundamental solution with my brand of metaphysical naturalism is that it admits that facts themselves are ultimately normative. When it runs into various kinds of descriptive facts, it can explain them as *successful*. \'91Ought\'92 is foundational to the bedrock of nature and the cosmos because everything ought to be some way. Most things *are* as they *ought* to be. But some aren\'92t. My brand of naturalism can explain both why descriptive facts are the way they are, and why normative facts are the way they are (most of the time) and why some things are *not* the way they ought to be; namely, rational creatures can err through overwhelming passion. \
\
### Conclusion and transition\
\
Neo-Aristotelians are one part of the growing revival of virtue ethics. I have tried to show why that revival is so popular (as far as any philosophical movement is popular) and make space for its core assumptions. Now I must proceed to defend the first premise of an ethical theory grounded in human nature: the premise that natural facts can be normative. Not all of nature, of course; I do not wish to defend the notion that "everything has a purpose", including stars and rocks, as if the cosmos were an orchestra being played. But at least some natural entities -- especially living organisms -- have ineliminable, irreducible, normative properties. For (1) some "generic statements" about natural kinds and their properties are both descriptive and fundamentally normative or teleological (for example, "penguins are birds", or "eyes are adapted for seeing"); and (2) some such statements are true. If these premises are true, then nature is normative, and we can know as much with the same ease by which we know that penguins are birds. My end game, pursued in later chapters, is to use generics as premises in arguments with ethical conclusions. It is, in some real sense, true, even without anthropomorphizing, that eyes ought to see.\
\
## Foot, McDowell, and MacIntyre on Ethical Nature\
\
For now, I would like to briefly survey the views of our neo-Aristotelians on the normativity of nature. \
\
### Foot on nature\
\
Foot pays strict attention to our status as natural entities. Evaluation of human creatures follows the same logical pattern as evolution of plants and animals. \'91Good\'92 as a predicate is not used without complement (\'91the house is good\'92) the way other predicates like \'91beautiful\'92 is used (\'91the house is beautiful\'92 ). \'91Good\'92 as a predicate is used with a complement (\'91the house is good for single mothers\'92) the same way other terms are, such as \'92useful\'92. Good is good *for*. \
\
Foot argues that virtues are instances of 'natural goodness.' This is a powerful thesis that she defends at length in her 2001 monograph.[@foot2001natural] Foot is aware that her offering in *Natural Goodness* is "crude" in that she is aware it will offend the ears of some listeners. Her defense is the thought from Wittgenstein that often crude beginnings are a necessary start to something refined. \
\
      Foot\'92s picture of nature is friendly to the Aristotelian picture. Those parts of nature that constitute living organisms are characterized not only by their material origins, material parts, and material organization but also by their functions. \
\
\
### Re-thinking the fact/value split\
\
She calls her inquiry a "fresh start." By this she means to do without several shaky assumptions of Moore and Hume. For example, Moore assumed that "good" was the ultimate predicate under review in ethics; but this is false. Statements like "pleasure is good" are not good paradigms for philosophical reflection. \
\
Contrast 'good' with other predicates like 'red' or 'beautiful.' In a statement such as 'the house is beautiful', the predicate 'beautiful' doesn't need a complement. The house is *beautiful* -- full stop. But 'good' (like 'useful') has a different logical function. 'The house is useful' does need a complement -- the house is useful *for a mom of six, or useful for an artist,* or what have you.  Similarly, 'good' always means *good for someone* or *for something.* 'Good' always needs a complement. \
\
### Life-form specific facts: biology and value\
\
What are the action-guiding facts in the case of natural goodness? Facts about humans and facts about objects in the world and facts about our relation to those objects.\
\
Virtue ethicists like Philippa Foot, and Peter Geach before her, express their thesis in statements like "virtues are necessary for human beings." The kind of necessity invoked here is not a sui generis ethical necessity but an instance of a familiar kind. That is, virtues for humans are like stings for bees, swiftness for deer, solidarity for wolves; there is a fundamental parity between natural goodness in nonhumans and humans. The parity is due to a common (metaphysical) structure shared by all living things as such. When we observe and examine living things we rightly employ some shared categories and our conclusions rightly share a logical structure. \
\
What is the common structure? Every individual living being is a member of a species or life-form. And different life-forms are subject to different normative appraisals. \
\
Thompson's groundbreaking *Representation of Life* argues that "life" is a fundamental concept. "Life" is not, as it may seem to some, a property of some beings where being is the fundamental concept. \
\
Foot\'92s picture of nature is friendly to the Aristotelian picture. Those parts of nature that constitute living organisms are characterized not only by their material origins, material parts, and material organization but also by their functions. \
\
\
\
### McDowell \
\
McDowell disagrees with Foot here. An evaluative judgment cannot be lifted, without intermediary, from a factual judgment. But then again, factual judgments cannot even be made without intermediation from human consciousness. There is no \'93Given\'94. Unless consciousness has \'91spontaneous\'92 activity already active in its receptivity to empirical experience, there is no empirical experience of things *as* being this way rather than that. \
\
McDowell\'92s picture of nature is radically dualistic. He is allergic to metaphysics in the sense that he doesn\'92t take himself to be attempting to describe the world as it is \'93given.\'94 Rather, he sees humans as occupants of \'93second nature\'94 \'97 our receptivity to reasons is not \'93baldly natural.\'94 Animals do not have a second nature but only a primary nature. Bald nature, primary nature, is descriptive. It is a Laplacian picture. McDowell is not alone in this criticism. \
\
\
### MacIntyre\
\
MacIntyre's position in *After Virtue* is closer to that of McDowell. For example, he says that his account of virtue (in chapter 15) is "happily not Aristotelian in two ways \'85 First, although this account of the virtues is teleological, it does not require any allegiance to Aristotle's metaphysical biology."[@macintyre1984after 197] Rather, he attempts to ground teleology not in non-human nature but in human nature, specifically our practical, social nature. We do not just act randomly or only according to instinct (that too); we act in groups, on reasons, and in pursuit of ends. Since we act in groups and for reasons, teleology is a real feature of our social nature. \
\
Nevertheless, in *Dependent Rational Animals*\'85. %\
\
\
\
### Chris Toner, "Sorts of Naturalism"\
\
Christopher Toner attempts to draw out just this distinction.[@toner2008sorts] Toner agrees with Hursthouse that the term 'Aristotelian naturalism' "implies that human nature is normative, such that to be morally good is to fulfill one's nature."[@toner2008sorts 221.] Hursthouse and McDowell can confirm this reading: Hursthouse herself says that "Virtue ethics, or at least any form of it that takes its inspiration from Aristotle, is usually taken to be a form of ethical naturalism -- broadly, the enterprise of basing ethics in some way on consideration of human nature, on what is involved with being good *qua* human being."[@hursthouse1998virtue 192] McDowell too believe that it is possible to "formulate a conception of reason that is, in one sense, naturalistic: a formed state of practical reason is one's second nature, not something that dictates to one's nature from outside."[@mcdowell1998two] However, Toner argues that Thompson\'92s, Hursthouse\'92s, and Foot\'92s brands of naturalism cannot adequately respond to a criticism McDowell (among others) have pressed. Toner presents four criteria that \'93naturalism must deliver if it is to support a revived Aristotelian virtue ethics\'85\'94[@toner2008sorts 222] \
\
\
\
\
#### Thompson\
\
Thompson's naturalism is "an attempt to work out the special logic of judgments we make about living things, and then to indicate its application to ethics." That 'special logic' is variously called "natural-historical judgment", "Aristotelian categorical", and (we might add) "generics".[see @leslie2008generics for a discussion of generics in general; and see  @bailey2015animalism for a discussion of a specific generic: "we are animals".] I shall use my preferred term, the shorter and less adorned, \'93generic\'94. Many generics take the form \'93S is F\'94 or \'93S has or does F\'94. They are not true universals that can be translated rigorously as \'93for any x, if x is an S, then S is F\'94 nor are they mere existentials that can be translated as \'93for some x, if x is S, then S is F.\'94 Particular or existential statements like the latter are true but uninteresting. A generic is interesting because it is, or we treat it as, a truth about forms, or species. The subject of the statement is not all S\'92s nor merely some S\'92s, but the \'93infama species.\'94[@toner2008sorts 222, quoting Thompson] Such judgments \'93admit of combination into teleological judgments\'94 such as *penguins are countershaded in order to avoid predators from above and below.* Thompson insists that judgments about natural teleology are made true from the form of life under question, not from \'93hypotheses about the past\'94 (and Toner adds \'93whether about creation or natural selection\'94).[@toner2008sorts 223. Cf. (Thompson 1995, 293)] Since an individual penguin may fail to be countershaded in the way that expresses its form, it would be defective. This defect is not a judgment made by scientists and \'93imposed\'94 as it were, from the outside, on the penguin; but a normative fact about the penguin. \
\
#### Foot\
\
Foot elaborates on Thompson\'92s type of naturalism. \
\
\
### Hursthouse\
\
Toner interprets Hursthouse as endorsing a modified type of egoism: \
\
>Dualism of this sort is hardly new \'97 it is characteristic of standard Kantian and consequentialist moral psychologies \'97 but it is a bit unusual for a virtue ethics claiming allegiance to Aristotle to embrace it. Indeed, it seems to raise the rather un-Aristotelian question about how to handle a conflict between fundamental practical commitments. Much that Hurst- house says hints that self-interest has priority: virtue ethics \'91\'91offers a distinctively unfamiliar version of the view that morality is a form of enlightened self-interest\'92\'92 (1999, 190). Also, she seems to recognize the McDowellian point that Aristotelian categoricals about how an evolved species as a matter of fact propagates itself through time may have little normative claim on a reflective agent. Her response is to insist that the life of virtue does in fact tend to promote the welfare of the virtuous agent, so that the commitment to one\'92s well-being seems more basic than, and a necessary ground of, the commitment to one\'92s functioning as a species member (see especially 1999, 259\'9660). \
> This move both highlights the power of McDowell\'92s critique of the Thompsonian form of Aristotelian naturalism and illustrates how tempting it is, for naturalists equipped with only a disenchanted nature, to allow eudaimonism to collapse into egoism.9 Hursthouse comes close to this collapse; Arnhart will come closer still.[@toner2008sorts 230] \
If generics are supposed to pick out natural properties of human beings, and if all such natural properties belong to disenchanted nature, then the ethical conclusions we draw will \'93collapse into egoism.\'94 Eudaimonia will get a very \'93disenchanted\'94 definition (pleasure, reproductive success, ff\
\
\
#### MacIntyrean Naturalism\
\
Toner argues that a naturalistic theory must satisfy four requirements:\
\
1. Natural norms must be intrinsically able to motivate the bearer of the nature. \uc0\u8232 \
\
The "natural norm" must be intrinsically able to motivate: desires that *do* motivate us satisfy this requirement. However, unless there is some "supervising principle" that coordinates desires (suppressing some, elevating others) the desires themselves seem to lead us to a sub-moral life; and the addition of such a supervising principle makes the theory no longer naturalistic. \
\
\
2. Natural norms must be intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of the nature. \uc0\u8232 \
\
The natural norm must be something that justifies itself, either to all rational agents as such or to all moral agents. The norm need not, Toner admits, automatically persuade a Callicles to repent of his wickedness. However, it must be able to motivate. \
\
>This is why I say \'91\'91intrinsically able to motivate or justify\'92\'92 rather than \'91\'91in- trinsically motivating or justifying\'92\'92: the natural norm is such that it can motivate or convince persons, provided they are not in too dysfunctional a state. In the same way a rose is such as to be intrinsically able to convince us of its being red. Its failure actually to do so in my case because I am color-blind or jaundiced does not impugn this intrinsic ability. Natural norms can motivate and convince because they are neither \'91\'91mere facts\'92\'92 about the way a given species does go on nor \'91\'91brute desires\'92\'92 a given species happens to have as a result of its evolutionary history.[@toner2008sorts 235]\
\
3. Natural norms must be anchored in and express universal human nature. \
\
\
>If we want a naturalistic virtue ethics that is self-standing, natural norms must be capable not only of expressing the commitments of this or that culture but also of justifying that one, criticizing this one, and so forth.\
But what sort of thing is this universal human nature to be, if we are to avoid the problems of Thompson and Arnhart? It is to be, as Thompson said, \'91\'91what was formerly called an infima species,\'92\'92 the representation of which expresses \'91\'91one\'92s interpretation or understanding of the life-form shared by the members of that class\'92\'92 (1995, 288). This view runs into the troubles catalogued above if (and only if) we understand \'91\'91one\'92s interpretation or understanding\'92\'92 to be that provided by modern \'91\'91value-free\'92\'92 science, a list of categoricals or natural desires supplied by anthropology and evolutionary psychology. Suppose instead this understanding of nature were supplied from the standpoint of a second nature seeking to understand its own development, so that the \'91\'91universal nature\'92\'92 of (3) would be at its core our shared tendency to become and then to be and act as certain kinds of people. First nature on this interpretation would be that in all of us which points toward and calls for the development of second nature, and second nature would be that which perfects and completes first nature. Another way of putting this is:\
\
\
4. First and second nature must be related so that the second is a natural outgrowth of the first, and so that that in our given makeup is (first) natural which does tend toward an ethically mature second nature. \uc0\u8232 \
\
\
>Alasdair MacIntyre writes that we can rightly understand the goods, harms, needs, and vulnerabilities of a certain species only by appeal to a notion of what it is for its members to flourish (MacIntyre 1999, 63\'9665). Now, for a living being to flourish it must develop its powers, especially those distinctive of it as a member of its species (there is more to flourishing than that, he allows, but this is at its core), and whether an individual or group is flourishing \'91\'91is in itself a question of fact, even though the question of what it is to flourish has to be answered in part through evaluative and conceptual enquiry\'92\'92 (1999, 64). \
>MacIntyre exemplifies the end-first approach sketched above, and it is worth quoting him at some length to see this:\
> As a question of fact it [what it is to flourish] receives answers in a variety of scientific contexts. Distinguishing between environments in which members of some particular species flourish and environments in which they fail to flourish and distinguishing within some particular population those individuals or groups of a particular species that are flourishing from those that are not is a necessary preliminary to framing certain types of explanatory question which we provided with answers by the biological and ecological sciences. Drawing these distinctions successfully involves identifying the various characteristics that an individual or population of some particular species needs in order to flourish in this or that particular environment, at this or that particular stage of development. (1999, 64\'9665)\
> We start with a revisable account of what it is for an animal to flourish (for example, being a good pack hunter) and then ask scientific questions about what sort of environment, the development of which distinctive powers, and so forth, the animal needs. Now, the power most distinctive of human beings as a species is, of course, rationality. We know this in part because were it not, it would not be the case that we, and only we, were asking questions about the powers distinctive of species. Also, writes MacIntyre, \'91\'91the question \'91Why should I do this rather than that?\'92 becomes from an early age inescapable and it is characteristic of human beings, that their replies to this question can themselves always be put in question. . . . Human beings need to learn to understand themselves as practical reasoners about goods, about what on particular occasions it is best for them to do and about how it is best for them to live out their lives\'92\'92 (1999, 67). So we know, says MacIntyre, that a flourishing human being is one who reasons well about how to live his or her life, is what he will call an \'91\'91independent practical reasoner.\'92\'92 That is our infima species or form of life. From this initial conception of flourishing, we can reason back to our needs, vulnerabilities, goods, and salient first-natural devel- opmental tendencies.\
\
>Much of the detailed argument must be passed over, but let us crystallize the point MacIntyre is making: membership in networks of giving and receiving is essential to human flourishing, and the exercise of the virtues is essential to the maintenance of such networks, and therefore to flourishing. And essential not just as instrumental to but as constitutive means of flourishingFvirtues are expressed in practical reasoning, and sustained and effective practical reasoning takes place only within net- works of giving and receiving.\
\
#### The task \
\
>Although I have tried to anticipate and turn aside some important objections, whether the MacIntyrean sort of naturalism is acceptable ultimately depends on answers to some rather large questions involving the nature of rationality (for example, whether it is tradition-constituted in something like the way MacIntyre says), moral psychology (for example, whether McDowell and MacIntyre are right in rejecting the \'91\'91hydraulic\'92\'92 psychology of neo-Humeans like Arnhart), and even metaphysics (for example, whether and how moral philosophy is related to theology). But such interdependences are what we must expect for an ethic purporting to be based on a true understanding of human nature. \
This chapter takes up one of Toner\'92s challenges: to defend a notion of practical reason as importantly constituted by \'93tradition\'94 \'97 that is, by particular cultural methods, facts, doctrines, and emphases transmitted within a particular people group over time. \
\
\
## My View: Can natural facts be normative? \
\
It is no secret in philosophy that to prove one's thesis one must begin by assuming, on page one, a premise which necessarily entails one's conclusion.  Such reasoning is, in one sense, circular. *Why should I grant your first premise?* the reader might ask. But it is not necessarily viciously circular. For any case intended to establish the propposition that P must postulate some premise Q as a hypothesis. Even if one tries to establish that Q, one will do so by assuming P, and the problem reiterates. If nothing can be postulated, nothing can be proven. \
\
The consequence of this reflection is that a great deal depends upon one's choice of starting premises.  My starting premise is this: **some generic statements are true.** That is, some of our empirical observations, and our rational reflection upon such observations, and our conclusions in the form of "generics" (to be explained below) which are scientific conclusions derived upon such reflections and observations, are true.\
\
So for example, I observe that the penguins appear to be birds (they have beaks, feathers, lay eggs, emit squawks, etc.). I reflect that most -- if not all birds -- have many of these macro features. I consult my encyclopedias, biology or zoology textbooks, or friends who are zoologists, and ask them whether penguins indeed are birds. They all confirm the categorization. From observations and reflections such as these, penguins earned an entry in the annals of scientific knowledge. They get a scientific name ('sphenisciformes'), a somewhat speculative evolutionary history, and increasingly detailed descriptions of their characteristics, genetics, environments, diet, predators, and so on. The scientific conclusion, upon initial observation, bolstered by reflection, is the statement that: penguins are birds.\
\
Another term for what I have called 'scientific generic statements' is generic statements, Aristotelian categoricals[@foot2001natural], natural-historical statements.[@thompson1995representation; @thompson2008life] What are these things? Consider the statement "all wolves hunt in packs." Logically, the proposition expressed in this statement is neither strictly universal nor strictly particular. It is not a strictly true universal judgment (for some wolves hunt alone, and some don't hunt at all). Furthermore, it is true but trivial that *some wolves hunt in packs*. The logical form of "all S's \uc0\u966 " does not predicate \u966 -ing to all members of the category S without exception, nor does it simply assert that some S's \u966 , which is true but uninteresting. The statement that "wolves hunt in packs" is only interesting if it is an item of conceptual knowledge about wolves as a *kind*. \
\
Andrew Bailey's recent paper arguing for animalism defines the thesis "we are animals" as a generic. He summarizes generics in the following way: \
\
>What are generics? A fine question, but a difficult one. Start with this sentence: [all ducks lay eggs.] This first sentence is, let us suppose, true. So far so good. But is it equivalent to \'91for every x, if x is a [duck], x [lays eggs]? \'91ducks lay eggs\'92 may be true even if not all ducks lay eggs, \'91mosquitos carry dengue fever\'92 may be true even if only a very few mosquitos carry that virus, and so on). We are now positioned to observe one curious property of generics: they admit of exceptions.[@bailey2015animalism 869]\
\
An exception to a universal judgment proves the judgment false. If a geometrician were to discover an exception to the proposition "All squares have four right angles", then the statement would be simply false. By contrast, exceptions do not disprove Aristotelian Categoricals. But if a biologist discovers an exception to the proposition "All reptiles lay eggs", then either the statement is false or she has discovered a new species of reptile that does not lay eggs. Confining ourselves to particular judgments like "Some reptiles lay eggs" would be radically unambitious science. \
\
Much of our conceptual knowledge consists in generics.[@prasada2013conceptual] Generics are not, strictly speaking, universal statements (since they admit of exceptions without falsification). They are not merely statistical regularities: suppose it is true that California condors can fly for hours without resting.[@cohn1999condor] Nevertheless, in 1987 there were only 27 known living condors; one could easily imagine a scenario in which every single remaining member of an endangered species are injured, old, or diseased and so none of them exemplify this attribute. It would be strictly true of the individuals of the species that *none* can fly for hours; nevertheless it would still true conceptually that "condors" can fly for hours.\
\
The first point is that **some generic statements (about natural entities and properties) are true.** For example, "penguins are birds"; "the black and white countershading pattern of penguin feathers helps them hide from predators"; and "penguins can swim up to 4 miles per hour"; "reptiles lay eggs"; "eyes are for seeing", and so on.\
\
How do we discover such generic truths? The same way we develop conceptual knowledge of anything in nature: by observation, reflection, experimentation, induction, etc. I believe germs cause disease because experts say so, but I believe penguins are birds and eyeballs enable sight because I have seen such creatures myself and inferred such truths. \
\
Although there certainly remain interesting and important details of generics to be worked out, to deny that generics are true and a significant bulk of our conceptual knowledge renders one unable to say much at all. \
\
Suppose for *reductio* that no generic statements are true. Then eyes are not for seeing, penguins' countershading does not help them avoid predators, and we must deny that normal penguins can swim up to 4 miles per hour. Such denials are, I think, absurdities.^[That is not to say that the denial is not worth considering. It might well be true. My point in calling the denial 'absurd' is to say that if it is true, an absurdity is true. If it is true, then the truth is absurd. And reality itself might well be absurd. I don't think it is, but there have been many philosophers who have thought so, and such thoughts cannot be justly dismissed without consideration. The absurdist (let us call her) who thinks all such scientific statements are systematically false would cheerfully deny that "penguins are birds", that "eyes are for seeing" and that "humans are mammals." She would renounce the bizarre belief that the earth orbits the sun or the unconscionable faith that earthquakes are caused by tectonic plate shifts. She is free to deny my thesis.]\
\
### Some generics are teleological or functional truths\
\
The notion that **generics are fundamentally normative** needs some arguing. Examples: "a penguin that cannot swim up to 4 miles per hour is either immature, injured, or defective"; "a lone wolf is not a normal wolf";  "eyes that do not see are either not fully developed, or injured, or ill. Since we know that "eyes are for seeing" we know that eyeballs that cannot see are *defective*.\
\
A critic who wants to affirm that some generics are true must, I believe, affirm that some generics are normative. We cannot say that generics are not normative without simply saying all generics are false. But neither can we rationally say that all generics are false. For generics constitute an astonishing percentage of our conceptual knowledge.[@prasada2013conceptual] No sooner have I been told that penguins are birds than I am told "All penguins are countershaded for camouflage \'96 that is, they have black backs and wings with white fronts." Talk of being shaded *for camouflage* is, of course, normative talk. Such talk is, more specifically, teleological talk. Natural teleology makes possible scientific, evaluative statements.  \
\
I see two paths forward: denial and acceptance. The first path would be to deny that generics capture the truth about nature and attempt to explain their ubiquity in another way, or to deny that statements about human nature are analogous to generic statements about plants and animals.[See @mayr1992teleology for an attempt to disambiguate the term 'teleology'; see @jackson1998metaphysics for an attempt to render reduction of normative to non-normative facts at least conceivable; see @millikan1989defense for an attempt to reduce the kind of teleological functions we seem to "read off" natural entities to an empirical history; and see @barham2011 for a counterargument to Millikan.] For instance, John McDowell defends a view that humans partake in morality (and rationality) by their "second nature" rather than primary, bald nature. Alternatively, one could attempt to reduce natural normativity to some other, broader, non-normative category. But McDowell is also far more comfortable than I am in denying that natural facts such as "penguins are birds" are "given" truths of nature available to the human mind without an idealist interpolation.\
\
The second would be to accept that much of our conceptual and scientific knowledge of nature takes the form of generic knowledge: knowledge about kinds, categories, properties, and patterns that are neither universal nor merely statistical regularities. Some take this path. For instance, he small but intrepid group of philosophers currently carrying this banner are *moral naturalists* of the neo-Aristotelian variety, like Peter Geach[@geach1977virtues] and Foot[@foot2001natural], and [@brown2008virtue]. Their work is so momentous because their ethical conclusions demand the maintenance of metaphysical premises, or at any rate because their metaphysical doctrines virtually emit ethical significance. \
\
\
### Coming to Terms with Natural Teleology\
\
The reader who is following the argument thus far and sees where it is heading may have more or less strenuous objections. \
\
\
We might put McDowell's complaint punchily in this way: human rationality is not part and parcel of nature, which is irrational or sub-rational. We cannot naturalize reason (eradicate or reduce it to *mere* bald nature) but neither can we justifiably project onto  non-rational nature properties of the human mind. \
\
Richard Bernstein calls John McDowell\'92s naturalism a much needed \'93novel twist\'94 on the stalemate between those who think naturalism will eventually make good on its promise to naturalize reason and those who are sick of waiting and ready to give up. He quotes Joseph Margolis and Mark Gottlieb as saying that: \
\
>Naturalism in the current analytic sense may well be the dominant programmatic orientation of Anglo-American philosophy. It may be characterized as an informally linked family of doctrines and strategies broadly in accord with 'ancestral' themes of W. V. O. Quine's "Epistemology Naturalized." The original themes feature in Quine include: a preference for physicalism of one sort or another, a strong emphasis on the continuity of science and philosophy, particularly at the explanatory level, and the effective replacement of legitimate inquiries of a typically noncausal sort by causal inquiries centering on belief." (Berstein 58) \
\
The "specter of Kant keeps surfacing in thinkers like Putnam and Habermas who are convinced that reason cannot be naturalized" (Berstein 59). The "novel twist" comes from John McDowell. Berstein says that \'93at first glance, it seems that McDowell fits right into the tradition of Kantian anti-naturalism \'97 a tradition that runs from Kant right up to Putnam and Habermas\'94 since he thinks \'93reason can\'92t be naturalized\'94 (Bernstein 62). But his arguments, Berstein thinks, against bald naturalism amount to some sophisticated question-begging via sleight of hand. %\
\
The view I am attempting to defend is closest to Foot's, and may be seen as demanding that reason and nature are unified. Some might describe this unification as the naturalization of reason, but others might describe it as the rationalization (or re-enchantment) of nature. Is enchanted nature naturalistic? I say that it is. But others have complained that Foot\'92s neo-Aristotelian \'93naturalism\'94 does not amount to a naturalistic theory. They object that Foot is not a "naturalist." Allen Thompson, though defending Foot overall, concedes the poignancy of the worry: \
\
>The objection I think I understand and want to take seriously starts from the thought that in employing such notions as life and organism and life-form or species we introduce something foreign, in particular something \'91biological\'92, or crudely empirical, into the elements of ethical theory. Any such view, one thinks, must involve either a vulgar scientistic dissolution of the ethical, tending maybe toward an \'91evolutionary ethics\'92, or else the covert substitution of an outdated metaphysics for what we know to be empirical. Each path leads to its own absurdities. Together they may be thought to betray a yearning to view our practices \'91from outside\'92 or \'91from sideways on\'92 in hope perhaps of providing them with a foundation or an external grounding.[@thompson2008life]\
\
In a different context, Hacker-Wright articulates much the same worry: \
\
> \'85we can see that Foot\'92s naturalism offers a fresh approach to objectivism in ethics. Yet, in spite of such attractions, *Natural Goodness* is in the midst of a cool reception. Here, I will argue that this reception is due to the fact that Foot\'92s naturalism draws on a picture of the biological world that is at odds with the view embraced by most contemporary scientists and philosophers. Foot\'92s readers commonly assume that the account of the biological world that she must want to adhere to, and that she nevertheless mistakenly departs from, is the account offered by contemporary neo-Darwinian biological sciences.[@hacker2009natural 309] \
\
Neither of these worries are justified.  I will offer one final argument that teleological generics are rationally permissible within our modern context. James Barham's recent work has argued that 'teleological realism' is a rationally permissible view to take on biology.[@barham2011] The very word 'teleology' is liable to sound quaint to modern ears. Barham clarifies the range of terms that denote identical or similar concepts: \
\
>"By \'93teleology,\'94 I have in mind such words and concepts as \'93purpose,\'94 \'93end,\'94 \'93goal,\'94 \'93function,\'94 \'93control,\'94 and \'93regulation,\'94 as well as the real- world biological phenomena to which these words and concepts refer. This means that the word \'93teleology\'94 should always be construed here in its internal or \'93immanent\'94 sense\'97purposiveness existing in living beings themselves\'97and never in its external or \'93transcendent\'94 sense of an overarching cosmic principle" (Barham 1). For a similar distinction, see Lennox (1992) and Brown (2001). \
\
We can add "purposive" and "goal-directed" to the constellation of concepts in the offing. \
\
Teleological realism in biology is making a come-back. There are those who protest teleological nihilism. Arnhart persuasively argues that teleology is assumed in medicine.[@arnhart1988] Zammito clarifies ongoing relevance in biology, since organisms seem to be intrinsically purposeful.[@zammito2006teleology] Barham continues: \
\
> In a series of important articles and books over the past decade or so, Bedau (1990, 1992a, 1992b, 1993), Cameron (2004), Christensen & Bickhard (2002), Jacobs (1986), Manning (1997), Maund (2000), McLaughlin (2001, 2009), Mossio et al. (2009), Mundale & Bechtel (1996), Nanay (2010), Nissen (1997), Perovic (2007), Walsh (2006), and Zammito (2006) have cast grave doubt on the coherence of any reductive analysis of function. Some of these authors (e.g., Jacobs, Maund, Zammito) call explicitly for a reconsideration of the possibility that teleological phenomena in biology might be both objectively real and irreducible. \
\
Thomas Nagel is a third who has followed out the argument for natural teleology from a much broader, cosmic perspective, though he too denies that the cosmos is like an orchestra being played.[@nagel2012mind] Though Nagel took a lot of heat for his argument, Michael Chorost's review of *Mind and Cosmos* reminds readers that natural teleology is not so scientifically heretical as it might first seem. He says: \
\
> Natural teleology is unorthodox, but it has a long and honorable history. For example, in 1953 the evolutionary biologist Julian Huxley argued that it's in the nature of nature to get more advanced over time. "If we take a snapshot view, improvement eludes us," he wrote. "But as soon as we introduce time, we see trends of improvement."... [the furthermore] paleontologist Simon Conway Morris, at the University of Cambridge, has argued that natural structures such as eyes, neurons, brains, and hands are so beneficial that they will get invented over and over again. They are, in effect, attractors in an abstract biological space that pull life in their direction. Contingency and catastrophe will delay them but cannot stop them. Conway Morris sees this as evidence that not only life but human life, and humanlike minds, will emerge naturally from the cosmos: "If we humans had not evolved, then something more or less identical would have emerged sooner or later."[@chorost2013thomas. Chorost argues that Nagel did not "go wrong" in his thesis but in presenting it philosophically without engaging the support from relevant scientific literature.]\
\
If scientists can countenance natural normativity via natural teleology as respectable, cannot we philosophers do the same? Certainly natural teleology is out of fashion; but the winds of intellectual fashion blow hither and yon, and we may yet discover that Aristotle was right.[@johnson2005] Either way, philosophers of various schools (metaphysicians and ethicists) would do well to dialogue with biologists and cosmologists to come to grips with the possibility that our best evidence suggests that nature is normative.\
\
All I have tried to show is that *some* of these generics are true. To those who disagree about the *nature* of generics, I have tried to urge them to feel free to do so, but to count the cost. The great cost of throwing out generics *as a class* threatens to throw out a huge percentage of scientific statements in biology, organic chemistry, anthropology, psychology, sociology, economics, anatomy, and medicine. \
\
I have not yet tried to show which true generics about humans can serve as the basis for an ethical theory. The first step to that end would be to apply the above argument to human beings. Human beings are natural entities importantly similar to animals and plants, though importantly different in exhibiting rational activity. By calling humans 'natural' here I only wish to present an innocent truism: we are here, in nature. We are material. Not necessarily *wholly* material, but are we *at least* material at all? Yes. Do we eat food grown on earth, drink water from the earth, are we born from fellow humans and do we die and disintegrate into the earth like every other living thing? Yes. So we are natural. Again, I do not mean to prejudge the question of whether we are *also more than natural*. I simply mean to invoke the obvious that the *we are at least natural*. Since we are (at least) natural entities, and since scientific statements are about natural entities, then it is possible (and indeed quite common) to make scientific statements about us. 'Humans emigrated from Africa about 200,000 years ago' is a statement about a natural species group, namely *homo sapiens sapiens*, the only extant members of the hominin clade. So, for example, 'Humans are language users' is a generic scientific statement. Since some such statements are generic, teleological statements, and since some such statement can be used as the basis of evaluative truths, some such statements about human can be used as the basis of evaluative truths. That shall be the task for the next chapter. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
#Virtues as Traits Necessary for Humans as Practical Reasoners\
\
"Man alone of the animals possesses speech." (Aristotle, *Politics*, 1.1253a)\
\
## Introduction\
\
Peter Geach says that virtues are necessary for humans as stings are necessary for bees.[@geach1977virtues 17: \'93Men need virtues as bees need stings. An individual bee may perish from stinging, all the same bees need stings; an individual man may perish by being brave or justice, but all the same, men need courage and justice.\'94] Philippa Foot echoes Geach's statement about "need" and "necessity" as well. Alasdair MacIntyre subtitled his most recent monograph: "human beings need the virtues."[@macintyre1999dependent] What kind of necessity is being predicated here? And for *whom* are virtues necessary? In brief, we shall argue that virtues are those acquired traits (deontically) needed for human beings as such to develop in humanity. Virtues are those qualities needed by us as members of the human species, each member of which exemplifies human nature.  \
\
## Applying Generics to Humans\
\
We saw in the last chapter how, in outline, an ethical theory might ground normative facts in natural, teleological facts. Against the alleged impossibility of deriving an ought from an is, we saw how we can derive an ought from a functional or teleology 'is'. And, we argued, some natural facts are not purely descriptive. \
\
This strategy will be used to ground ethical facts in human nature. Now we must go further and specify what kind of life it is we as human beings live arising from what kind of creatures we are. Of course, the difficulty comes in attempting to move from such vague statements to particular moral statements: 'Human beings make and keep promises.' This will give us initial insight into the concept of virtue, which is our main theme. The subsequent chapters will provide more detail into the nature of virtue. \
\
Michael Thompson summarizes: \
\
>"\'85we may view this line of thought as beginning with the idea\'85 that will and practical reason are on the face of it just two more faculties or powers a living being may bear, on a level with the powers of sight and hearing an memory. The second crucial thought is that an individual instance of any of the latter powers \'97 sight, hearing, memory \'97 is intuitively to be judged as defective or sound, good or bad, well-working or ill-working, by reference to its bearer's life-form or kind or species."[@thompson2009life 29]\
\
## Foot's application to human nature\
\
As Foot says, the major differentia of humans is rational will. \
\
### Brown, good people\
\
### Hursthouse's application\
\
>When we moved from the evaluations of other social animals to ethical evaluations of ourselves, there was an obvious addition to the list of aspects which are evaluated. The other animals act. So do we occasionally, but mostly we act from reason, as they do not, and it is primarily in virtue of our actions from reason that we are ethically good or bad human beings. So that is one difference that our being rational makes.[@hursthouse1998virtue 217] \
\
>This is a major part of the genuinely transforming effect the fact of our rationality has on the basic naturalistic structure. But has it transformed the structure beyond recognition? I said that ethical naturalism looks to be doomed to failure if it depends on identifying what is characteristic of human beings as a species, in the way their pleasures and pains and ways of going on are characteristic of the other species. By and large we can't identify what is characteristic of human beings as a species in this way\'97there is too much variety. And even if we could, it looks as though we would not allow anything we identified to carry any normative weight if we thought it was something we could change. So is ethical naturalism, after all, a non\uc0\u8208 starter?[@hursthouse1998virtue 222]\
\
## McDowell on second nature and *Bildung*\
\
McDowell argues that humans are different from other (physical) natural objects in that we inhabit "second nature" -- the space of reasons. The realm of normativity, for McDowell, is not the realm of "bald nature" but the realm of reason. As I have tried to argue in the previous chapter, the realm of normativity *is* the realm of ... McDowell would accuse me of trying to "re-enchant" nature; if I deny anything, I deny the quasi-magical aesthetic of the word "enchant." Normativity is, I have been at pains to insist, scientific; judging that an organism fails to exemplify its life-form well is both a normative and scientific judgment. So the question McDowell and others ought to be asking is not whether the thought that nature is normative is enchanting but whether it is *true*. \
\
John McDowell's famous essay "Values and Secondary Qualities" argues that values are like colors and unlike shapes.[@shafer2007 In-text citations in this paper refer to McDowell's "Values and Secondary Qualities" in Shafer-Landau and Cuneo (eds), *Foundations of Ethics: An Anthology.* Blackwell, 2007]  That is, values are qualities in the world (not just in our heads) but they are not Lockean "primary qualities." They are Lockean secondary qualities. Making sense of this claim is the goal of the first part of this essay. \
\
McDowell's claim about values fits within his larger project, which follows Kant in defending idealism as a third way between the extremes of naive realism and radical skepticism. McDowell rejects these and labors toward an alternative realist in some respects and skeptical in others. McDowell's project also follows the (later) Wittgenstein in doing "therapeutic" philosophy.[@mcdowell2008critics] That is, McDowell believes most philosophical puzzles arise not from puzzling reality but from errors in *our own thinking*, so we need "therapy": bad ideas need to be *exorcized*. \
\
I shall offer two responses: the first is to critique an assumption common to McDowell and his interlocuters.  Despite their differences, McDowell shares with Mackie and Blackburn a radically reductive, disenchanted, Laplacian picture[@plantinga2011conflict 84] of material nature as a manifold of bald descriptive facts. This picture of nature forces McDowell to hastily reject all forms of realism. His criticisms can guide the would-be realist in sculpting a more plausible account. The second response is to contrast the Laplacian picture with an alternative, hylomorphic account of moral realism.  I would suggest that an essentialist, formal-material metaphysics fits McDowell's account of "the fearful" better than he might wish. If the three options he presents are not the *only* options, he owes an account of why hylomorphic realism is not a plausible alternative to the realism he rejects. \
\
## Sensibility theories ##\
\
Let's try to articulate McDowell's third way by representing his critique of the realism/anti-realism debate. Since McDowell is running between horns of orthodox disjunction between moral realism and anti-realism, he is often in the awkward position of having to attack a position without thereby supporting its apparent opposite.[@mcdowell1996mind. In this book, he attempts to dissolve the "vascillation" between naive empirical realism and "Rampont Platonism".] For example, McDowell sides with Mackie in affirming that moral values are not primary qualities of the world but sides *against* Mackie (and Blackburn) in denying the apparently opposite notion that values are *nothing but* subjective. \
\
### With Mackie, against realism  ###\
\
Mackie's error theory gets right the common sense view that "ordinary evaluative thought [is] a matter of sensitivity to aspects of the world."[@shafer2007 137] Ironically, the view that moral facts are real, objective facts has been both praised as "common sense" and alternately blamed as "platonism".[@gibbard1992wise 155: "It might be thought ordinary conceptions of rationality Platonistic or intuitionistic. On the Platonistic Picture coma among the facts of the world are facts of what is rational and what is not. A person of normal mental powers can discern these facts. Judgments of nationality are thus straightforward apprehensions of fact, not through sense perception through a mental faculty analogous to sense perception..." ] But Mackie presents as exhaustive disjuncts *either* moral realism *or* moral anti-realism. Mackie, of course, thinks we must deny the appearances, must contradict common sense, and so must embrace error theory. But McDowell denies Mackie's disjunction.\
\
The naive realist view that moral values are response-independent McDowell judges "impossible -- at least on reflection -- to take seriously..."[@shafer2007 137]  The reason McDowell can't take naive realism seriously is that he finds one sort of internalism absurd. He points to a "worry about how something that is brutely *there* could nevertheless stand in an internal relation to some exercise of human sensibility."[@shafer2007 143] In this McDowell agrees with Mackie that the central doctrine of European moral philosophy is a mistake -- the belief that some things by virtue of what they are and what we are *merit* certain responses. This doctrine certainly runs afoul of the modern doctrine that nature is a manifold of pure fact without any normativity 'built in', and without any internal relation to evaluators like ourselves; but it might be that the modern doctrine is the mistake. The hylomorphic analysis I sketch below shows an essential (and plausibly metaphysically realist) parity between evaluators and evaluated, between valuers and values, between mind and world. \
\
Mackie thinks that conceiving of colors as primary qualities is a "common sense" notion that is false but at least *coherent*; McDowell questions this. If it were true that colors were qualities adequately conceived apart from their essentially phenomenal subjective aspects, then suddenly the concept of red becomes opaque. If we exclude the phenomenal aspect of redness and attempt to define 'red', we are at a loss. So it seems that redness is as a primary quality is not "common sense" and not even coherent. \
\
Redness, rather, is an essentially phenomenal concept; its subjectivity is so to speak 'built in.' That is not to say all essentially phenomenal concepts are nonveridical; just that they are not 'thoroughly objective'.[@shafer2007 138, quoting Mackie]\
\
### Against Mackie, against projectivism  ###\
\
One option available to McDowell is just to affirm error theory. But against Mackie (and Blackburn, and others), he rejects error theory (which he will also call "projectivism"). Why not treat redness and other secondary qualities as purely "projective"? Secondary qualities are "subjective" in that they cannot be adequately conceived "except in terms of certain subjective states"[@shafer2007 139] but not in that they are therefore illusory. A secondary quality is not "a mere figment of the subjective state that purports to be an experience of it."[@shafer2007 139] \
\
McDowell defends the Lockean distinction against a different sort of schema that would categorize "shape and color" on one side (as objects, in the world, etc.) and "my experiences of shape and my experiences of color" on another side (as taking place in the subject, as phenomenal, experiential, etc.). Certainly there is a phenomenological bit to seeing shape just as there is of seeing color; but shape unlike color can be conceived without reference to the phenomenological bits. \
\
McDowell thinks that Mackie's denial of realism is the denial that moral properties are *primary qualities.* Rather, the objective aspect to values that are *just there* must be a dispositional property, while the evaluable aspect is something we as perceivers or moral evaluators bring to the world.  Value is not a Lockean primary quality of reality; value is not utterly unreal. The *via media* is that value is a secondary quality. \
\
### Sensibility and Danger ###\
\
In short, McDowell's view of values is a "sensibility theory". Sensibility theories teach that moral properties are like colors. He says a secondary property ascription is true "in virtue of the object's disposition to present a certain sort of perceptual appearance."[@shafer2007 138] Experience of secondary qualities is a (sense) perceptual experience. This a Lockean doctrine. Redness is not *merely* a microscopic texture property (say, the texture that scatters all light waves except red ones) because microscopic textures don't *look red* and things that *look red* appear so to observers with no knowledge of such textures. \
\
Colors are response-dependent, while other properties (say, 'squareness') are response-independent. Color-properties must be defined partly by their "objective" or response-independent aspects and partly phenomenologically. Shape-properties, by contrast, can be defined by their objective or mind-independent aspects. It makes no sense to speak of what *redness is* apart from perceptions of red *in perceivers*. Similarly, it makes no sense to speak of "dangerousness" apart from a subject who is potentially vulnerable. So, perhaps, it also makes no sense to speak of "rightness" apart from a subject who potentially judges the value of a thing. \
\
Yet by the same token right and wrong are not *purely* invented. The property of "being such as to look red" may or may not be *have ever been perceived as red* by any observer (if, for example, the appropriate conditions have never obtained). So a Lockean secondary quality may be response-independent in some sense, but it is not *redness as such*. It is the dispositional property that is disposed to present us with a appearance of a particular phenomenal character. So values (like colors) are dispositional properties. \
\
The theory of danger also helps McDowell in his conclusion deny that his view is a variant of "projectivism." The "epistemology of danger" that arises from McDowell's "theory of danger"[@shafer2007 142-3] helps explain moral epistemology. There is *something* about red things *themselves* that makes them give us redness experiences; there is something about the dangerous animal itself that gives us fear experiences. That something is not *the form of red* or *the form of danger*, but it is also not *nothing.*\
\
The "theory of danger" is intended to capture this "something" with the important notion of *merit*. Red objects *just appear as red* to us under the proper circumstances. They *just do* dispose us to have red experiences. But dangerous objects *merit* appearing fearful and dangerous. They *merit* that we have a fear experience. \
\
## Hylomorphism ##\
\
Now, I shall elucidate a widespread but "disastrous idea" inherent in the Laplacian picture of nature wherein mind and world are inherently divorced, and sketch an alternative hylomorphic picture. My goal in sketching the alternative is not to offer a full-blown defense, but rather (1) to render plausible the suggestion that McDowell's "third way" is not the only alternative to realism or anti-realism, and (2) to challenge McDowell's own account of danger, which I believe tells more in favor of hylomorphic moral realism than he himself would prefer.  \
\
### The Laplacian Interface ###\
\
The Laplacian assumption common to Mackie and McDowell is makes it not just false but "impossible to take seriously" an internal, natural, inherent, intrinsic, or necessary connection between our evaluations and the real world. Mackie and McDowell imagine an "evaluation" floating free of any evaluators, which is -- I grant -- absurd. This is the an "interface" picture of nature, where world is inherently separate from mind. If mind and world are to be connected, they must be joined as plug and socket or else be forever separate. \
\
But perhaps mind and world are distinct the way a higher note is distinct from its lower octave: they share a common structure. McDowell implicitly commends this view with his discussion of danger. Dangerous animals (say, wild Grizzly bears) are not considered dangerous because we project our fear onto them the way arachnophobics  project their fear onto the most harmless of spiders. But neither are Grizzlies dangerous because they possess a special property "dangerousness" that they would possess even if humans never evolved or if humans were extinct. Rather, danger or the fearful is a natural connection between predators and prey who share a common structure as earth-born animals. \
\
There are natural facts about the animal kingdom  -- facts about the diet and hunting habits of bears and facts about human vulnerability. In this case, danger is an internal relation arising between bears and humans. This gives us a picture of a metaphysical realism that underwrites "danger realism". And this is strikingly akin to a hylomorphic brand of moral realism. In this way, McDowell vascillates between a Laplacian picture of nature and the Aristotelian picture. \
\
### Hylomorphic Realism ###\
\
If "restricted nature"[@fink] excludes by definition universals, forms, or essences of any kinds, then it excludes a fortiori universals that are necessarily related to our motivations and desires. But I suggest that this picture is inaccurate. The hylomorphic picture of nature can explain both the objectivity and the normativity of moral facts, and can plausibly unite our pre-theoretical view of nature (the manifest image) and our theoretical view of nature (the scientific image). \
\
Briefly, on the hylomorphic account, every natural entity is a matter-form composite. The matter of say, a bird, is the familiar stuff of feathers, bones, skin, organs, and so on; the form is the bird's structure or \'93configurational state.\'94[@stump1999aquinas 382] The form is the arrangement of stuff of which the bird is made, at the cellular level, the genetic level, or what have you. \
\
Human beings are matter-form composites too. One of our formal capacities is intellectual. Aristotle defines the intellect as the cognitive capacity to *think universals* by abstracting them from one or more particulars. \
\
The upshot of this matter-form metaphysics is that the object evaluated and the evaluator are both matter-form entities. Universals are natural in that they inhere in natural kinds and make them what they are. But *thinking* universal thoughts is also natural to humans since our minds are part of the world. Our thoughts about universals are one branch of nature, and the universals in things are another branch; but both share one root. \
\
The formal identity of the object and the mental act is the natural union possible between mind and world. That union is simply knowledge. John Haldane summarizes this knowledge-as-identity between knower and known as follows:  The \'93content-determining principles of perception are one and the same as the character-determining principles of the objects of perception \'97 the identity of act and object.\'94[@haldane1996coming 296]. In short, the world is constituted by matter structured according to principles, and the mind is constituted by matter structured according to the same principles.\
\
Although McDowell is inspired by Aristotle, he does not follow through on metaphysical realism or essentialism. But Haldane's comments (made about Hilary Putman) also apply to McDowell: his sensibility theory is \'93not incompatible with an ancient version of philosophical realism.\'94[@haldane1996coming 288] This realism takes the intentionality relation between mind and world (e.g., thought and content, speech and referent, etc.) to be a primitive phenomenon \'93in the sense of being an intrinsic and non-derived feature of certain states...\'94[@haldane1992putnam 675.] Since this phenomenon is primitive, it is intrinsic to mind itself and world itself. \
\
This means that the world something *we evaluate* but also the world is *intrinsically evaluable;* by the same token, humans are evaluators but are also intrinsically evaluable. Every natural entity's evaluability is a function of that entity's formal-material structure. Since a human-in-the-world and the world itself share a common (metaphysical) structure, internal relations  -- like the relations between value and motivation McDowell finds so puzzling -- also obtain. \
\
## Conclusion ##\
\
In this section, I attempted to summarize McDowell's sensibility theory and his reasons for rejecting realism and projectivism. Values as secondary qualities captures the objective bit about color while also capturing the recalcitrant subjective bit. In response, I tried to uncover a deeply-held assumption shared by McDowell and his interlocutors that minds are divorced from and must either interface with or remain utterly divided from the world. This is the assumption that renders unthinkable the notion that there are necessary relations between the world and our mental or motivational states. At the same time, I tried to show how McDowell's account of danger shows the way to challenge this assumption, since mind and world, the evaluator and the evaluated, can share a common biological history or metaphysical structure that grounds such necessary relations. Much to McDowell's chagrin, I'm sure, I pushed this challenge even further to sketch a hylomorphic account of moral realism. \
\
Perhaps the most ambitious claim I can make is not that McDowell ought to accept hylomorphism, but that I do not see any good reason why he should not. \
\
\
\
## MacIntyre on Dependent Rational Animals\
\
For MacIntyre, who is allergic to metaphysics, he does not give a robust account of nature. He seems to assume a Laplacian picture of disenchanted nature in *Dependent Rational Animals*: nature which is a somewhat random bricolage of matter, energy, constants, wave functions, and so on, and somehow produces living organisms which through mutation and natural selection become creatures like us. \
\
\
\
## My view: Virtues are needed by human beings as practical reasoners\
\
So let us apply the conceptual structure we outlined in the previous chapter to human beings. We first, let us remember, abstract generic truths about the nature of a class of living thing, from which we can evaluate individual members of the class, individual living things. \
\
'Human beings are rational animals' is a generic. Hence it is descriptive and  evaluative/normative. Initially, we can conclude that if human beings *really are* rational animals that an *irrational* human is ipso facto defective.^[To call a human 'defective' sounds like a schoolyard insult; but it is a straightforward, evaluative description of some people.] I do not here intend to discuss mental illness, disability, birth defect, chromosomal disorders, and other such exceptions to 'normal' functional humans. \
\
Virtues would be those character traits that rational animals *need*, tout court. They need them to *become* fully rational animals. While I will discuss in detail the natural human telos in a later chapter, here I only assert that actualizing the potential latent in human nature is necessarily good for us.[@bloomfield2012eudaimonia] All of the good things of human life enable the realization of a fully human life. Not all good things are subject to our control. The virtues are among those good things under our control -- good dispositions we each choose to cultivate or fail to cultivate. Unlike other goods (say, wealth), virtues become *what we are*. \
\
Human nature is to be a rational animal. In the old classificatory schemes, philosophers provided a genus and a differentia. In contemporary classificatory scheme, we can locate ourselves as animals in the phylum chordata, the class mammalia, the order of primates, the suborder haplorhini, the familiy hominidae, the genus homo, the species homo sapiens. What is our differentia? In a word, reason, or rationality. \
\
What are our rational capacities? First, speech.[@deacon1998symbolic] We are speaking animals. But through speech comes a whole second cosmos of culture. Through speech comes intentionality in all its forms. Through speech comes communication ("pass the salt"), distinct languages and cultures (about 5,000 distinct languages), self-consciousness ("who am I?"), abstraction ("all grass is green"), science, philosophy, religion, mythology, technology and more. Perhaps even art and music arise from the rational capacity to direct our actions to create not only what instinct demands but whatever the imagination can invent.[@orians2008nature. Orians says that "Americans spend more money on music than on sex or prescription drugs."] \
\
Rationality is also the capacity to judge true and false, to affirm and deny. This is the view of Aristotle and the neo-Aristotelians (among others). Rational capacities are identified by the actions of rational creatures. As Haldane says, quoting the medieval scholastics, "acting follows being" and "things are specified by their power."[@haldane1998return 262] We just do deliberate, explain, propose theories, judge truth and falsity, wonder, inquire, and so on. As far as *recorded* history goes (which isn't very far), we have always done these things. \
\
While I shall have to say more about practical rationality in a future chapter, here I need only to specify that our nature as rational animals *includes* the notion that we are practically rational animals. Practical rationality is the capacity to judge what is good or bad, what is to-be-pursued or to-be-avoided. It is still *rationality* since the questions of what is good admit of true and false answers. They often require reflecting on what was is will be might be or must be best. Humean psychology paints human psychology as two non-overlapping magisteria, an entirely non-rational set of passions and an entirely non-passional rationality. Reason is not impractical, it is not merely theoretical. Reason can be and is also practical; thought results in practice. Practical rationality is not merely irrational. Some emotions "make sense" given the situation. John McDowell argues that, for example, danger makes sense to feel in the presence of a wild bear in the woods.[@mcdowell1988values] Disgust in response to some human bodily functions is apt; awe and wonder in response to viewing the starry heavens is apt.[@gibbard1992wise] Pain is not only painful but *bad*; pleasure is, in moderation, not only pleasant but *good*.[@nagel1980ethics] To borrow Gibbard's phrase, practical rationality is a capacity for *thinking what to do*.  Motivation, most broadly, is necessarily related to reasons one discovers and endorses, especially reasons that count in favor of an action or attitude, all things considered.\
\
### Objection: There is no single human nature\
\
Perhaps there is no single nature shared by all humans. Perhaps Stephen Brown's paradox is true: "Human nature is variability itself."[@brown1999human] The variability of human lives, cultures, and beliefs is due to our freedom from the tyranny of genetics and environment. In other words, the major difference between humans as natural entities and other natural entities is our set of rational capacities. Unlike any other creature in the physical cosmos, we demonstrate the ability to speak, to think, reason, deliberate, judge, set projects, pursue goals, reflect, communicate, form societies, create cultures, and so on. \
\
### Objection: There are no "natures" or inherent forms\
\
A powerful (if vague) Darwinian objection from metaphysics that there is no such thing as a biological \'93nature\'94 anyway.[@hursthouse1998virtue chapter %%; @brown2008virtue chapter 5; @ward2013against] Bertrand Russell playfully jabs this definition thusly: "Man is a rational animal \'97 so at least I have been told. Throughout a long life I have been looked diligently for evidence in favour of this statement, but so far I have not had the good fortune to come across it."^[Bertrand Russell, *The Basic Writings of Bertrand Russell* (2009), p. 45 %%]  Part of the skepticism from analytic philosophers to the neo-Aristotelian project stems, I think, from this worry. Nevertheless, the concept of nature being deployed here is  of the appeal of the neo-Aristotelian project is a clear concept of nature that applies to both humans and other animals. \
\
A nature is an abstract property. It is a set of capacities delimiting the range of potentialities of a given object or living being. The concrete blue-footed boobie is not a nature, but exemplifies the nature of blue-footed boobies. \
\
Natures, as we shall see, is an empirically discovered and inductively generalized set of potentialities latent in a species. Human nature is a set of potentialities to realize our animal and intellectual activities, including reproduction, metabolisis, rational choice, abstract reflection, and so on. \
\
This is the solution to Russell's playful jab. Not all people \'97 not most, perhaps not even many people \'97 fulfill their rational potential by becoming thoroughly rational people, free of the banes of intellectual life: ignorance, intellectual laziness, illogical inferences, the distractions of irrational psychological factors, attachment to prejudice and bias, informal fallacies, and so on. Rather, overcoming all these banes would exemplify the fulfillment of human nature. \
\
### Objection: We don't know our nature\
\
Someone might respond to the question of what is human nature by saying:  we don\'92t know. For all we can tell (without the benefit of divine revelation) humanity is an anomaly. Our origin is shrouded in mystery, our destiny undecided. The story we are told in biology and anthropology textbooks is that 200,000 years ago, hominids somehow developed new cognitive abilities sufficient to justify calling one or a set of these creatures \'93the first humans.\'94 Our earliest direct, archaeological evidence of our ancestors is that they were artists: paintings adorn the caves of France. \
\
The evidence of recorded histories from Babylon, China, and Egypt tell a story of humanity already busied with architecture, science, imperial politics, and bustling with trade, culture, language, and art. The student of human nature ought to be a historian. To pursue my theme, we must move on. \
\
If our deep origins are shrouded in mystery, our future destiny is relatively clear. By any account, our species is doomed.  The science fiction dream of off-world colonies is most likely just a dream: no livable other planet has been discovered within our solar system or any of the surrounding regions. Even if one were discovered further out, along concentric circles each light years in diameter, the practical limitations on space travel for large numbers across unimaginable distances render off-world colonization virtually impossible. The only possibility left, itself highly impracticable, seems to me that scientific technology advances to a point that we can conceivably *create* an atmosphere on a planet that does not currently have one. \
\
Regardless of these dreams, if our current planet does not go into an ice age, or a dust bowl, or become a nuclear wasteland, or if a volcanic canopy does not eliminate conditions for organic life, then *eventually* the running down of our sun will condemn our species to the same fate of 99% of all species that have existed up until now: extinction.\
\
Bertrand Russell's famous essay "Free Man's Worship" poetically describes the cold, hard, reality of the natural destiny of the human species: \
\
>That Man is the product of causes which had no prevision of the end they were achieving; that his origin, his growth, his hopes and fears, his loves and his beliefs, are but the outcome of accidental collocations of atoms; that no fire, no heroism, no intensity of thought and feeling, can preserve an individual life beyond the grave; that all the labours of the ages, all the devotion, all the inspiration, all the noonday brightness of human genius, are destined to extinction in the vast death of the solar system, and that the whole temple of Man's achievement must inevitably be buried beneath the debris of a universe in ruins--all these things, if not quite beyond dispute, are yet so nearly certain, that no philosophy which rejects them can hope to stand. Only within the scaffolding of these truths, only on the firm foundation of unyielding despair, can the soul's habitation henceforth be safely built.\
\
Russell sees two possible structure that can be built on the "firm foundation of unyielding despair." The first is to worship power (which is the choice of slaves) and the second is, even in the face of death and annihilation, to worship ideals of truth and goodness (which is the choice of the free). The freedom and nobility of humanity lies in our cognition, even our recognition that we are slaves. He continues:\
\
>The life of Man, viewed outwardly, is but a small thing in comparison with the forces of Nature. The slave is doomed to worship Time and Fate and Death, because they are greater than anything he finds in himself, and because all his thoughts are of things which they devour. But, great as they are, to think of them greatly, to feel their passionless splendour, is greater still. And such thought makes us free men... To abandon the struggle for private happiness, to expel all eagerness of temporary desire, to burn with passion for eternal things--this is emancipation, and this is the free man's worship.\
\
Russell points to the noble impulse to cultivate our rational capacities in the light of our impending doom. I shall return to this theme in a later chapter. \
\
## Objection: Why is it "necessary" to be virtuous? \
\
So virtues are the acquired traits needed by creatures like us, by social rational animals. There are a couple of objections in this connection I would like to address here. The first is the objection that the acquisition of virtues is morally optional. Not all theorists are virtue theorists; not all moral agents are theorists. But all moral agents (we can here assume) have the obligation to be moral. \
\
This objection, as stated, misses the point. By arguing that virtues -- whatever they may turn out to be -- are those qualities needed by practical reasoners, we are not arguing about the *concept* of virtue but that *very qualities themselves*. Any culture, business, family, civilization, will thrive insofar as it is virtuous and disintegrate insofar as it fails. Virtue is necessary because it is human. Justice, prudence, and courage are "needed in any human-scale enterprise"[@geach ], from motherhood, to a successful career, to farming.\
\
Put negatively, the thesis of this chapter is that vices necessarily contribute to misery, unhappiness, and human stultification and stagnation. Human nature is the starting point, flourishing is the goal, and the moral and intellectual virtues are the means by which we move from start to goal. Vices are those qualities that partly constitute human misery. Many kinds of living conditions are miserable; excessive cold or heat; starvation; illness; mental handicap; injury; extreme isolation and loneliness, and so on. But these kinds of circumstances are not *always* and *necessarily* miserable. Rather, being a lying, treacherous, scheming, envious, whining, daydreaming moral agent is truly miserable, even such happens to have a comfortable bed to sleep in and enough money to get through life. Such a person is despicable, a worthy specimen of human failure. \
\
Some vices, especially intellectual vices, are especially despicable. Not everyone has equal amounts of intelligence conceived as raw mental horsepower. Some children even at a young age excel at doing \'93mental math\'94 or memorizing geographical names, while others never acquire the knack for it. However, not all unintelligent people are stupid in the deplorable sense: stubborn, unteachable, slow to learn and resenting every bit, arrogant, smug, self-satisfied, and willfully ignorant. Such persons demonstrate intellectual vices noxious to all their fellows except those equally debased, and especially noxious to those unfortunate enough to be their teachers, parents, or guardians. And such intellectual vices are in a special way exemplary of human failing. \
\
### Objection: Beneficial by definition? \
\
The second objection, building on the above response, is about the very definition of virtue as a *beneficial* or \'93positive\'94 character trait. To see the problem, suppose we define \'93boldness\'94 as *doing hard things* and \'93courage\'94 as doing hard things when it is good. Boldness is, so to speak, value neutral. One can be bold in wrongdoing or bold in doing well. If courage is just boldness in doing good, is this a trivial truth? An analytic truth? The affirmation that \'91courage (doing hard things when it is good) is good\'92 would appear to amount to the life-altering revelation that 'good things are good'.\
\
This is an important objection but also misses the point. It is a synthetic truth discoverable only by reflection that humans have a nature, a telos, and that some character traits are conducive to the realization of our telos while others are conducive to our stultification. Peter Geach argues that just because an ethical conclusion is virtually un-revisable doesn't mean it is content-less.[@geach1977virtues, Chapter 1] All truths are true, in part, in virtue of the words used. But not all truths by definition are empty and content-less; rather, the stuff of life from which we derive our conceptual definitions or which we must fit into our conceptual definitions is a contentfull task.\
Let's consider this objection in another way. \
\
Some ethical propositions are thought to be self-evidently true: it is good to be good. This is a tautology. And most (if not all) tautologies are trivial.  Other ethical propositions are not tautologous but are so widely and commonly accepted as to be easily mistaken for tautologies: it is good to be kind; cruelty is bad. Pleasure is good. Wise people make good leaders. I ought to keep my promises. A just society is desirable. Fools are ridiculous and the wise are admirable. \'93Do good and avoid evil\'94 (called the first principles of practical reason). Moderation is good (called the foundation of all ethics). \'93Drunkenness\'94 or alcoholism are shameful. The Golden Rule (called the only objective rule in both religious and atheistic moralities). Injustice is bad. We ought to care for children and respect elders. Generosity is admirable. \
\
Of course, if we define \'93kindness\'94 simply as \'93a good disposition to treat others well\'94 then it appears that \'93it is good to be kind\'94 amounts to the same tautologous proposition \'93it is good to be good.\'94 But kindness is *not* best defined simply as *something good*. Kindness, it seems to me, and to many others upon reflection, is a special sort of quality we can recognize and name but not ultimately define. Cruelty, likewise, we \'93know it when we see it.\'94 There is more to our recognition of cruelty than the arbitrary application of \'93a bad disposition to hurt others.\'94 We know that children who tortures animals for fun is acting cruelly. We try to help him or her to satisfy curiosity or get parental attention through other means. We help them stop nursing a disposition to cruelty. \
\
These ethical propositions do not seem to me tautologies. Call these non-tautologous but basic ethical propositions Platitudes. Some Platitudes are small, others great. \'93It is polite to say please\'94 is a Platitude. But \'93treat others as you would wish to be treated\'94 is a Great Platitude. \
\
Some philosophers take their task to be to debunk the Great Platitudes. They wish to explain them away, to explain *why* they are false and *how so many people fall in for them*. The platitudes are either *false* (\'93know your place\'94 taken as a justification of socio-economic or gender inequality is false) or as trivial; *of course* \'93murder is unjust\'94 is true because, \'91murder\'92 is defined as \'91unjust killing.\'92 \
\
Other philosophers take their task to be to *underwrite* the great platitudes. They wish to explain them, to explain why they are true and how it is we learn them, preserve them, and (most crucially) live well by taking them as sound practical advice. Both philosophers are sophisticated; but one is sophisticated in attacking and explaining away the Great Platitudes while the other is sophisticated in defending and explaining them. \
\
As examples of the Debunkers, consider J. L. Mackie and Alan Gibbard. Mackie claims to be running counter to the great tradition of European moral philosophy.[@mackie] Gibbard\'92s metaethical works aim to capture our common sense belief that morality is objective but without the Platonism. He says, "It might be thought ordinary conceptions of rationality Platonistic or intuitionistic. On the Platonistic Picture coma among the facts of the world are facts of what is rational and what is not. A person of normal mental powers can discern these facts. Judgments of nationality are thus straightforward apprehensions of fact, not through sense perception through a mental faculty analogous to sense perception..."[@gibbard1992wise 155]\
\
As examples of Defenders, consider G. E. Moore, Robert Adams, and Frank Jackson. Moore\'92s grandiloquent denouncements of moral philosophy are not, as one might expect, the harbingers of a revolutionary transvaluation of values; by the end of *Principia Ethica* he has given a sophisticated 300 page articulation of the yawningly common judgment that beauty, friendship, and knowledge are goods. Robert Adams\'92 metaethical work aims to capture the common sense belief that morality is objective\'85 by providing a systematic defense of Platonism. Plato sees goodness as becoming like god: \'93Fleeing [evil] is becoming like god so far as one can, and to become like god is to become just and pious with wisdom.[@plato *Statesman* 176a5-b2; @armstrong2004after] And Adams defends this resemblance relation as well. But not all Defenders are non-naturalists. Frank Jackson\'92s influential account of functionalism[@jackson1998metaphysics] aims to naturalize \'93mature folk morality\'94 without necessarily invalidating all of it. \
\
It does no good to object that the Great Platitudes are *evil* or *oppressive*, binding women to social subjugation or condemning the poor to poverty. Rather, the corrections to the errors of European (and more broadly, western) moral philosophy are contained *within the resources* of western moral philosophy. \'93Do unto others as you would have them do unto you\'94 tells more powerfully against sexism or classism than any revolutionary ideal. \
\
\
## Objection: aren't we social animals?\
\
Another interlocutor might object to the narrowly *rational* description of human nature. Aren't we social animals? Or practical animals? Or symbolic animals? Why not describe human nature as social, practical, symbolic, rational animals? \
\
This is an excellent objection. However, sociality and practicality are subsumed under the concept of rationality. To think is to think in words learned from one's parents or guardians. To think is also, in some respects and at some times, to think how to live. To think and even to imagine is to think in symbols and words derived from our culture and our family. So we do not need to multiply words; we simply need to properly define rationality.  \
\
## Two corollaries: Our rationality depends upon our education; If human nature is as "rational animals" then the unity of virtues as each depending on practical reason.[@wood2014prudence] \
\
There are two corollaries to this initial, formal definition of virtues as those traits human beings as practical reasoners need. The first corollary is the importance of moral and intellectual education. \
\
The beginning of human life, like the beginning of any organic life, is the foundation for all that follows. When a mother drinks heavily or uses cocaine while pregnant, the child is going to suffer the negative consequences for the remainder of his life. When a child is abused -- emotionally, verbally, physically, or sexually -- by her parents, the psychological cost is meted out across the entire life and across generations. By the same token, when a mother eats healthily and takes her vitamins while pregnant, the child is going to reap the positive consquences for the remainder of his life. When a child is given love, approval, empowerment, discipline, by her parents, the psychological gains are meted out across the entire life and across generations. The original source of most people's life maxims are not their ethics professors, favorite novels, Holy Bibles, or therapists, but their parents or other guardians.  \
\
This fact is obvious but we must never forget it. It is important to the argument because we should never give into the temptation to think that the cultivation of virtue is simply a business for adults (least of all adult professional academics) to argue for and against. It is the business of societies and families to do or fail to do every day. \
\
The second corollary is a partial solution to the conundrum about the unity of virtues. Are there many virtues or just one? And if there are many, are they unified or a fundamental plurality? We should expect, on the basis of our nature as rational animals, that all virtues will be united in our rationality, and that our various concepts of virtue will be united in an appropriate concept of rationality. This is just what we will defend in a future chapter. \
\
## Conclusion\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
#Virtues as Excellent Character Traits\
\
*"[Wisdom] teaches temperance and prudence, justice, and courage."* Wisdom 8:7.\
\
**Contents**\
\
<!-- MarkdownTOC -->\
\
- Introduction\
      - Virtues as human traits needed by practical reasoners like us\
      - Philippa Foot: Excellence of the Rational Will\
      - John McDowell: The Moral Outlook on How to Live\
      - Alasdair MacIntyre: Rational Tradition\
      - Compare, Contrast, Synthesize\
      - How many virtues?\
      - Are virtues inborn?\
      - Is the pursuit of virtue egoistic?\
      - Questions for future chapters\
- irtue as Excellence of Practical Reason\
      - Summary\
      - Introduction\
      - 1. Although it seems that reason cannot motivate, practical reasons are the *primary* meaning of motive.\
      - 2. Is practical reason instrumental?\
      - 3. Is moral reasoning a special type of practical reasoning?\
      - 5. Is morality about oneself or only others?\
      - 6. Is there only one virtue?\
      - 7. Is practical reason objective like logic?\
      - 9. Is practical reason 'natural'?\
      - Conclusion\
- irtue as Realizing our Natural Human Telos\
      - Summary\
      - Introduction\
      - MacIntyre\
      - Foot\
      - My View on Telos\
      - 3. Is there telos like happiness for humanity? Destiny and destination\
      - 4. Stephen Brown\'92s Darwinian objection that \'93happiness\'94 of our species is gene propagation, which seems to transform ethics into a descriptive discipline;\
      - 5. Ruth Millikan\'92s objection that an organism\'92s proper function cannot be read off its capacities but must be known via empirical history.\
- irtue Conclusions\
      - Summary\
      - Introduction\
      - Appendix\
- irtue, Nature, Naturalism\
      - Summary\
      - MacIntyre on nature\
      - Foot on nature\
      - Annas on Nature\
      - My view on nature\
\
<!-- /MarkdownTOC -->\
\
\
## Introduction\
\
In this chapter, I offer an account of human virtue per se. I begin by summarizing and discussion the three accounts from Foot, McDowell, and MacIntyre, before attempting to point out the discrepencies, harmonize the commanalities, and synthesize what is good in each. I defend the resulting novel neo-Aristotelian account against various objections. \
\
## Virtues as human traits needed by practical reasoners like us\
\
\
Before we talk about the four cardinal virtues in the recent neo-Aristotelians, we need to step back and do some of the formal work applying the premises of the argument from the previous chapters to the present topic: excellence.\
\
The Greek word often translated as 'virtue' is *\uc0\u945 \u961 \u949 \u964 \u942 *, and means 'excellence'. We must beware a misunderstanding here. Not all excellence is *moral* excellence. Foot, for one, recommends examining Aristotle and Aquinas (and others) for their view on virtue, but cautions against terminological misunderstandings. Firstly, *Arete* for them refers \'93also to arts, and even to excellences of the speculative intellect whose domain is theory rather than practice\'94[@foot2002virtues 2].  Secondly, *arete ethikai* (or *virtues morales*) do not correspond to our moral virtues. For those of us who take the traditional list seriously, there are four moral virtues: courage, temperance, wisdom, and justice; for them, wisdom or *phronesis/prudentia* is an intellectual virtue. Thirdly, not all the qualities we moderns might call "moral qualities"  (e.g., unselfishness) can be attached to a genuine virtue. Instead of simply assuming that the terms 'excellence' or even 'moral excellence' can provide us a short-cut to understanding the concept of virtue, we must do the work ourselves with attentiveness.\
\
The moral virtues or vices, as we have argued, are those excellent qualities a person can acquire that both enable and partly constitute the realization of our human telos or enable and partly constitute its opposite. \
\
Even so, 'excellence' is a relative concept; an excellent knife is one that *cuts well* where an excellent guard dog is one that barks loudly, is hostile to strangers, and so on. Excellence is, then, relative to a given object's function. Of course, the objects just mentioned (knife and guard dog) have artifical functions assigned to them by human users. But as we have argued above, natural objects perform functions as well that can be 'read off' the object's activity. If one knows the natural function of an entity, evaluations as to its excellence or defect are not purely subjective impositions of the evaluator's preferences or opinions, nor are they "facts" given by the situation. Rather, the evaluator must judge the function of the thing and judge how well its performance matches up or fails to match up to that function. \
\
Now, it is very arguable whether humans qua humans have a function. I shall discuss this in a bit more detail in a later chapter. It is also arguable, even if we do, whether we have one definite function (e.g., to think) or a an unlimited set of functions (e.g., to do and become whatever we want, whatever that might be) or some definite plurality (e.g., to survive, to reproduce, to enjoy ourselves, and to reason). \
\
Excellence is relative to generic truths about the nature and potential of natural kinds. We have argued that human beings, too, have a nature and have argued that it is our nature to be rational animals. Even in extreme cases when a person's set of potentialites for rational activity such as speech and abstract thought is not realized because of genetic disorder, injury, or mental or physical illness, they are *a human being* by virtue of having a *human nature*, tragically unrealized or unrealizable. \
\
Human being as rational *animals* by nature need to breathe, eat, sleep, and stay warm, deal with the urgings of our sexual nature, and so on. Human beings as *rational* animals need to live and make decisions. We need to plan, think, deliberate, reflect, assume identities, pursue projects, and so on. It is undeniable that we *act* and we sometimes *act for an end*. Unlike animals who *act* and even *pursue* objects like food and safety, we pursue ends *as ends*. So, we may tentatively hypothesize that the qualities that enable us to pursue our ends *well* would be excellent qualities. The practical, rational agents who consistently succeed at pursuing and achieving their ends would be models of virtue.  I shall have much more to say below about what ends people *have* or *ought to have* and about the indeterminate concept of a human telos.^[Eudaimonists believe our telos to be human flourishing or happiness. Others believe it is something else, such as genetic proliferation, the creation of the self, or what have you. We shall return to this in a later chapter]\
\
The virtues, on this account, admit of an initial, formal definition: virtues are those dispositions to act well in the universal projects of human life and to react well to the universal challenges of human life. \
\
What detail can we give to this formal definition? Let's begin by working through the virtue accounts of Foot, McDowell, and MacIntyre. \
\
## Philippa Foot: Excellence of the Rational Will\
\
Foot argues that virtue is excellence of the rational will. I have hitherto avoided the word 'will' because it is not a cross-cultural concept.^[Cf.@Bradshaw2009mind. There Bradshaw distinguishes the cluster of concepts such as heart, mind, and will, and shows that for the Hebrews and for Aristotle they did not have a concept of a 'will' as a sub-rational faculty for choosing.] Even Foot will expand her concept of will beyond its typical meaning to include intentions (see below). Since now is not the place to distinguish the two concepts, I shall herein treat her 'rational will' as identical to my 'practical rationality'. \
\
We saw above that virtues are, for Foot, examples of 'natural goodness.' This phrase that so puzzles many of Foot's contemporaries (and our own contemporaries) indicates that the concept of goodness being deployed in appelates such as a 'good person' is structurally the same as the concept of goodness in 'a good oak' or 'a good wolf.' A good person exemplifies those good-making features shared by all exemplary members of a natural species. What exactly can we say about such good-making features of rational animals? \
\
Foot's account of virtue unfolds across four key propositions. (1) Virtues are beneficial, to self and others, while vices are bad for self and others; (2) virtues are distinct from skills (such as strength, keen eyesight, reliable memory, etc.) because such excellences are not excellence of will or practical reason; (3) virtues are corrective of some tempting vice; and (4) virtues are only operative toward good ends. Let's examine each of these propositions in turn. \
\
### Virtue is beneficial \
\
She begins with necessary conditions: A virtue is beneficial. She says, \'93Human beings do not get on well without them. Nobody can get on well if he lacks courage, and does not have some measure of temperance and wisdom, while communities where justice and charity re lacking are apt to be wretched places to live, as Russia was under the Stalinist terror.\'94[@foot2002virtues 2-3] But whom is benefited? Does a person possessing a virtue benefit the virtuous person or the society in which the virtuous person lives? For some virtues, the answer is more clearly \'93both\'94: temperance benefits oneself and one\'92s family or community. For other virtues, such as justice or charity, the answer is less clear. She says, \'93It is a reasonable opinion that on the whole a man is better off for being charitable and just, but this is not to say that circumstances may not arise in which he will have to sacrifice everything for charity or justice.\'94[@foot2002virtues 3] \
\
Foot finds the alleged paradox between what we might wish to call "selfish" and "altruistic" virtues overblown. The cases in which virtuous deeds necessitate the loss of other goods are not so devastating as they might appear. It might be that, on occasion, it is better (say) for my family that I sacrifice my health in working hard to earn higher wages; while on other occasions it is better for my family that I sacrifice higher wages keep myself healthy. Geach similarly downplays this alleged emnity between my "inclinations" and the moral law, pointing out that oftentimes my inclinations lead me to obey the law. \
\
She recommends "leaving unsolved problems behind us:"\
\
>Let us say then... that virtues are in general beneficial characteristics, and indeed ones that a human being needs to have, for his own sake and that of his fellows. This will not, however, take us far towards a definition of a virtue, since there are many other qualities of a man that may be similarly beneficial, as for instance bodily characteristics such as health and physical strength, and mental powers such as those of memory and concentration.[@foot2002virtues 4]\
\
### Virtue is more than strength \
\
The more interesting question is how to distinguish moral virtue from a great memory, keen eyesight, or other admirable qualities we do not intuitively classify as virtuous. \
\
What, for example, distinguishes virtue from strength? At first glance, the answer seems to be something about the *will*; Foot thinks virtues are revealed not only by a person\'92s abilities but by his or her *intentions.* But what are intentions? Foot argues that the \'91will\'92 must be understood in its broadest sense, \'93to cover what is wished for as well as what is sought.\'94[@foot2002virtues 5] Intentions are not the *only* thing we judge, for a well-intentioned nincompoop who always harms when "helping" is rightly judged as deficient in virtue. Neither do we only judge the result of a person's action, for we sometimes exculpate a failing performance in part because the person *meant well*, though it also perhaps it the exculpation is called for because circumstances were not favorable, chances of success were low, etc. \
\
Foot attempts to capture the point that we admire someone who not only does the right thing but who has conditioned himself to do the right thing fluently and almost instantly. She quotes from John Hersey\'92s novel *A Single Pebble* in which the narrator relates watching a man save a boy from drowning:\
\
>It was the head tracker's marvelous swift response that captured my admiration at first, his split second solicitousness when he heard a cry of pain, his finding in mid\uc0\u8208 air, as it were, the only way to save the injured boy. But there was more to it than that. His action, which could not have been mulled over in his mind, showed a deep, instinctive love of life, a compassion, an optimism, which made me feel very good.\
\
Foot\'92s comment on this passage is this: \
\
>What this suggests is that a man's virtue may be judged by his innermost desires as well as by his intentions; and this fits with our idea that a virtue such as generosity lies as much in someone's attitudes as in his actions. Pleasure in the good fortune of others is, one thinks, the sign of a generous spirit; and small reactions of pleasure and displeasure often the surest signs of a man's moral disposition.[@foot2002virtues 5]\
\
In other words, the outward behavior (the swift response) discloses not only the man\'92s intentions and attitudes, but something even deeper; settled dispositions that can be betrayed in the smallest facial expressions or the most \'93instinctive\'94 gut reactions. Robert Adams's concept of 'being for' is helpful in this connection. We intuitively (and correctly) judge that one must *be for* the good in the most general sense of orienting oneself -- in thoughts, deeds, words, intentions, and wishes --  toward the good. \
\
If virtuous dispositions are "multi-track,"[@hursthouse1998] is it necessary that good intentions and attitudes be effective in good action? If so, it seems that virtues become skills. But as we saw comparing virtue with strength, there seems to be something flat about calling the virtuous person *merely* skillful.^[Julia Annas's argument that virtues are skills of a particular type takes advantage of the intuitive similarity between virtue and skill. Cf. @annas2011intelligent.] The worry here is that we don't want to call skills morally valuable when they do not seem to have any moral import. Is a contracter who excels at hammering 16d nails into wooden frames to be admired for his *virtue*? Is the quarterback who can make accurate throws under pressure virtuous? This seems to us moderns to smack too much of the "Homeric" sense of virtue as *any* admirable quality. \
\
What, if anything, differentiates virtues from skills? Foot's solution is an interpretation of the line from Aristotle that "in the matter of arts and skills... voluntary error is preferable to involuntary error, while in the matter of virtues... it is the reverse."[@foot2002virtues 7] While this might be a bit baffling, the thought seems to be that deliberately erring in an art or skill is compatible with mastery; the teacher can err on purpose in order to instruct students. By contrast, deliberately erring in morality is still an error. One ought not steal to demonstrate to children that stealing is wrong. \
\
### Corrective\
\
Foot also argues that virtues are "corrective". That is, each one stands "at a point at which there is some temptation to be resisted or deficiency of motivation to be made good."[@foot2002virtues 8] In this discussion, she is illuminating a statement of Aristotle that "virtues are about what is difficult for men" and also objecting to a statement of Kant that *only* "actions done out of a sense of duty" have moral worth. In this connection, she discusses Kant's problem of the happy philanthropist. This problem is the troubling and dissonant conclusion that if a very generous philanthropist gets great pleasure out of helping others then such actions display no moral worth. Surely a commonsense moral judgment would accord moral worth to the very fact that the philanthropist *enjoys* doing what is good (which Aristotle builds into the definition of a virtuous person); he doesn\'92t just grit his teeth and do good (which Aristotle would call mere *continence*). \
\
Kant's error, according to Foot, is in failing to distinguish that which is "in accord" with virtue from that which is *virtuous* full stop. It may be, for example, that a novice tennis player makes an expert shot while remaining merely a novice. The hit is in accord with excellence but is not, in this case, an instance of excellence -- only beginner's luck. In her self-love example, Foot points out that there is no virtue required to eat one's breakfast and avoid life-threatening danger, but there may sometimes be cases where self-love is a duty -- even a difficult, painful duty. She says, "sometimes it is what is owed to others that should keep a man from destroying himself, and then he may act out of a sense of duty."[@foot2002virtues 13] So the solution to the happy philanthropist problem is that if he really does have such a character as to be delighted helping others, he is morally praiseworthy *because he has worked to achieve that character*.  As she says: \
\
>For charity is, as we said, a virtue of attachment as well as action, and the sympathy that makes it easier to act with charity is part of the virtue. The man who acts charitably out of a sense of duty is not to be undervalued, but it is the other who most shows virtue and therefore to the other that most moral worth is attributed.[foot2002virtues 14]\
\
Since charity is a "virtue of attachment" (I should say "affection"), the feelings of the philanthropist count in favor of proving the presence of a virtue. \
\
Of course, commonsense judges that a philanthropist who persists in virtue even when he does not enjoy giving is also praiseworthy. Foot explains this too. She allows that it may take greater virtue for a man to *persist* in his philanthropy *even when* it brings him no delight. \
\
>Only a detail of Kant's presentation of the case of the dutiful philanthropist tells on the other side. For what he actually said was that this man felt no sympathy and took no pleasure in the good of others because \'91his mind was clouded by some sorrow of his own\'92, and this is the kind of circumstance that increases the virtue that is needed if a man is to act well.\
\
For someone who has acquired a kind of immunity to some kinds of temptation is through sustained effort and in many small victories is, ipso facto, especially admirable. Virtues are indeed corrective of tempting vices and tempting moral errors. However, the presence of temptation is not a necessary condition for the presence of a virtue. \
\
\
### Virtues are operative toward good ends\
\
Can virtue enable the more efficient achievement of ignoble aims? On the one hand, examples are easy to furnish: a murderer displays courage; a prude displays temperance. It seems commonsensical that whatever attributes we designate as courageous can be found in agents pursuing bad ends. On the other hand, the Aristotelian line excludes such a possibility by definition. Jonathan Sanford's recent monograph, *Before Virtue*, argues that Aristotle's doctrine is "ethics insists it is impossible to exercise any virtue, with the exception of technical skill, wrongly."[@sanford2015before 163] Foot attempts to do justice to both these concerns. The analogy is to poisons or solvents: \
\
>It is quite natural to say on occasion \'91P does not act as a poison here\'92 though P is a poison and it is P that is acting here. Similarly courage is not operating as a virtue when the murderer turns his courage, which is a virtue, to bad ends. Not surprisingly the resistance that some of us registered was not to the expression \'91the courage of the murderer\'92 or to the assertion that what he did \'91took courage\'92 but rather to the description of that action as an act of courage or a courageous act. It is not that the action could not be so described, but that the fact that courage does not here have its characteristic operation is a reason for finding the description strange.[@foot2002virtues 16]\
\
An agent's commission of an otherwise virtuous action may be a mistake *for that agent* at that time. This may seem ad hoc, but we must remember that Foot is attempting to make space for the "commonsense" observation that some good traits operate to bad ends *within* the philosophically rigorous definition of virtue as beneficial. \
\
One objection Foot responds to is the worry some might have that she is saying *only* those who are completely virtuous are virtuous at all. She has two responses: wisdom always operates as a virtue. While it might make some sense to speak of "foolish courage" (recklessness) or "foolish moderation" (prudishness) it makes no sense to speak of 'foolish wisdom'. Since wisdom always operates as a virtue, we admire wisdom perhaps most of all. As we shall see in John McDowell's discussion of the virtuous person's perceptual capacities, it might be that when we admire a person's courage or moderation,we are often admiring the *wisdom in* the courage and the moderation. \
\
A second response, though, is that we do admire some who have only a subset of all the virtues: \
\
>There are some people who do possess all these virtues and who are loved and admired by all the world, as Pope John XXIII was loved and admired. Yet the fact is that many of us look up to some people whose chaotic lives contain rather little of wisdom or temperance, rather than to some others who possess these virtues. And while it may be that this is just romantic nonsense I suspect that it is not.[@foot2002virtues 17]\
\
Even those whose overall life is a mishmash of virtues and vices are admirable. My interpretation of this sentiment is that such are admirable insofar as they demonstrate some excellent qualities. \
\
### Transitioning from Foot to McDowell\
\
For Foot, virtues are those beneficial qualities that we need qua human beings in order to safely navigate the normal human temptations to corrupt oneself and others. These qualities are what Hursthouse calls multi-track, embroiling our whole psychology as it is directed by what might call the 'will' or 'practical rationality', including intentions, attitudes, deliberative choices, and habits. Virtuous traits are only 'operative' toward good ends, and so even once acquired they stand in need of the governance of practical wisdom. \
\
## John McDowell: The Moral Outlook on How to Live\
\
*A disastrous idea ... has haunted Western philosophy since the seventeenth century... that perception involves an interface between the mind and the \'91external\'92 objects we perceive.* (Hilary Putnam, \'93Sense, Nonsense and the Senses,\'94 *Journal of Philosophy*, 465.)\
\
McDowell's writings on virtue and value have been formed by two main influences: the "Socratic tradition" and Wittgenstein.[@mcdowell1998mindvalue] As we briefly saw above, his concern has been to dissolve worries about the mind's relation to the world, specifically those worries that arise from false dualisms. The Greeks had a world-view within which such dualisms did not arise; so perhaps some of their conceptions can help us for whom such dualisms arise as a matter of course in many philosophical contexts. \
\
One criticism of McDowell is that he is not a realist but merely an "anti-anti-realist". I think this criticism misses the mark. His goal is not to *defend* an Aristotelian sort of realism in the place of subjectivism but (like Wittgenstein) to attack subjectivism and then cease to talk about the issue. Failing adequately to defend realism criticizes McDowell for missing the bullseye on a target he was not aiming at. Another criticism of McDowell is that he posits a dualism of his own: the dualism between (primary) nature and "second nature". Primary nature is the bald, disenchanted world of mindless matter and energy. Second nature is the partially re-enchanted human world of rationality, value, intentionality, social life, culture, and education. This criticism cuts more deeply since, if it can be made to stick, it accuses McDowell of failing to hit the bullseye on the target he explicitly wishes to hit. \
\
### Virtue as knowledge\
\
McDowell's theses are: \
\
1. "The point of engaging in ethical reflection... lies in the interest of the question 'How should one live?'"[@mcdowell1979virtue 331]\
2. Virtues are kinds of knowledge and *virtue* is a kind of knowledge. \
3. The question of how to live must be approached from "within" a moral outlook and approached "*via* the notion of a virtuous person."[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] \
\
Let\'92s examine each of these in turn to uncover McDowell\'92s account of virtue. \
\
The first point is that ethical reflection aims at answering the ever relevant question "How should one live?"[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] We notice that ethical reflection is *reflection* about *practice*. It seems to me that this obvious truth is almost too close to be seen, like one\'92s nose. It is far too often overlooked. We do not *merely* act (like a deer or a dog) nor do we *merely* calculate (like a computer or an angel); we reflect upon what we ought to do, how we ought to live. Such reflection only makes sense concerning issues within my control. Insofar as one cannot but sleep sometimes, the question of whether or not to sleep at all is not an ethical question; it is not in my control. Insofar as one can either stay or go, pursue or avoid, harm or help, such decisions are ethical decisions and the question of how to live is an ethical question. One must decide which larger, longer-term projects to pursue and which objects are worthwhile to obtain; and one must, along the way of these long-term pursuits, decide rather extemporaneously how to react to the vicissitudes of circumstance.  Each of us must decide how to react to the \'93slings and arrows of outrageous fortune.\'94^[*Hamlet* III.1]\
\
As for the thesis that virtue is a kind of knowledge, McDowell argues that morality is *practical knowledge* (a \'93disposition to act well\'94). Such practical knowledge (and this is the third point) seems to demand "a moral outlook" to act well.[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] To see why it makes sense to conceive of virtue as practical knowledge, suppose that some platitudinous value (say, kindness) is really a virtue. The kind person is reliably kind and is kind *on purpose*. A person who merely happens to be kind or who commits acts of kindness resulting from blind instinct does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. A person who is kind once, or even every now and then, likewise does not seem to merit the ascription of a virtue. Rather, a kind person is one who is regularly sensitive to a range of reasons for behaving in a particular way. The kind person, McDowell adduces, "has a reliable sensitivity to a certain sort of requirement which situations impose on behavior" and such "deliverances of a reliable sensitivity are cases of knowledge."[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] The kind person *knows* what is called for, is intentional about avoiding cruel or indifferent behavior, and so on. \
\
If kindness is \'93a sort of perceptual capacity\'94, \'93specialized sensitivity\'94 to a particular range of reasons for action (say, the feelings of others), then perhaps the same holds true for other virtues.[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] In fact, McDowell suggests, the notion that virtues are specialized sensitivities \'97 each a kind of knowledge \'97 helps us understand the Socratic notion of the unity of virtue. \
\
These reflections support the notion that this kind of knowledge ("sensitivity to reasons") is necessary for the virtue but not sufficient. For it might be that one is sensitive to what another would feel but still fail to act rightly. Why? Perhaps, like the overindulgent parent, one is *too* sensitive to the feelings of the child or *not sensitive enough* to other considerations, like the child\'92s health or (McDowell\'92s example) fairness. The virtuous person is sensitive to a whole range of reasons; since reason A and reason B might commend different acts, part of virtue must be the meta-cognitive capacity to reflect upon all those reasons available to one, to rank and order them. \
\
McDowell\'92s \'93preliminary case\'94 that virtue is knowledge is that the \'93requirement imposed by the situation\'85 must exhaust his reason for acting as he does.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] It would disqualify the act as a candidate for an example of kindness if the agent performed it *because* it was kind *and because good repute was likely to follow*. If we run the same calculus on each particular virtue, we can hypothesize that virtuous agents\'92 behavior in each case is explained by their sensitivity to those particular kinds of reasons. In turn, their behavior in general (when virtuous) is explained by their sensitivity in general. He concludes, \'93thus the particular virtues are not a batch of Independent sensitivities. Rather, we use the concepts of the particular virtues to mark similarities and dissimilarities among the manifestations of a single sensitivity which is what virtue, in general, is: an ability to recognize requirements which situations impose on one's behavior. It is a single complex sensitivity of the sort which we are aiming to instill when we aim to inculcate a moral outlook.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 333]\
\
**Objection**: An objection to the view that virtue is a \'93single complex sensitivity\'94 to requirements upon one\'92s behavior arises from considerations of the internalism/externalism debate regarding moral motivation. Suppose two persons in the same situation are equipped with identical perceptual capacities and so sensitive to the same range of reasons for action, but only one of them does the right thing. If such a supposed situation were to obtain, it would disconfirm McDowell\'92s conclusion. But, McDowell points out, one man\'92s *modus ponens* is another man\'92s *modus tollens.* If virtue is to be identified with a single complex sensitivity, then a supposed situation in which two persons perceive a situation and its practical requirements identically but act differently cannot obtain.[@mcdowell1979virtue 333] Socrates took this line. But McDowell suggests we look to Aristotle.  Aristotle allowed that \'93appreciation of what [a virtuous person] observes is clouded, or unfocused, by the impact of a desire to do otherwise.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 334] The point of such an allowances is that the break between the sensitivity to reasons (which is virtue) and a resultant wrong action occurs when other psychological factors interfere. What interference? McDowell mentions desires and also a \'93distortion in one\'92s appreciation\'94 of the relevant reasons.[@mcdowell1979virtue 334]\
\
**Objection**: McDowell cites Donald Davidson who argues to the effect that a person might fail to perform the resultant right action even without such interfering factors. The reply is that the point is true, but it is not an objection. Aristotle\'92s account of continence details that continence is not a virtue. The continent person is able to perform the right action because he recognizes it as right, *despite* countervailing pressures (from desires, say) to do the wrong action. Since a fully developed virtue definitionally includes having the proper motivation as well, continence is only needed in the absence of a fully developed virtue. Furthermore, the virtuous person is not always one who \'93balances\'94 reasons for X against countervailing reasons for Y. The virtuous person is the one for whom simply identifying a reason (\'93in this situation, courage requires that I run into danger\'94) silences countervailing reasons. The virtuous persons sees the danger (and perhaps feels rightly apprehensive) but also sees that courage in the face of this danger is required; the latter perception, according to McDowell, \'93silences\'94 other pressures.[@mcdowell1979virtue 335] The merely continent person has to \'93weigh\'94 reasons; the virtuous person fluently and instantly *acts* on the best reason.\
\
**Objection**: Is virtue-knowledge *codifiable*? McDowell considers the objection that if virtue is knowledge, \'91knowing-what-to-do\'92 must be codifiable in propositional form. But \'91knowing-what-to-do\'92 is not codifiable, so virtue must not be knowledge. On this objection,  the virtuous person enjoys knowledge of one or a few universal ethical precepts and reliably calculates the application of those principles to individual occasions. The virtuous person\'92s ethical arguments \'93take the form of a \'91practical syllogism\'92\'94 wherein the universal proposition is the major premise and the \'93relevant particular knowledge\'94 is a minor premise, while the issuing conclusion is the judgment of \'93what is to be done.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 336] Furthermore, on this objection, the defender of Humean moral psychology can keep the identification of relevant particular knowledge with a \'93minor premise\'94 but substitute the proposed major premise (a proposition such as \'93It is always good to be courageous\'94) with a non-cognitive desire or commitment (such as \'93*I want* to be courageous\'94 or \'93Be courageous!\'94). Now, they can explain how a virtuous person and non-virtuous person can both perceive a situation identically but fail to perform the same action with reference to their different desires or commitments. \
\
The problem with this objection, McDowell thinks, is not so much a problem with our moral theory but a problem with our conception of rationality. The problem stems from a \'93deep-rooted prejudice\'94 that rationality is a rule-following procedure. If rationality is a rule-following procedure, then it follows that *either* practical rationality and morality are likewise rule-following procedures *or* that practical rationality and morality is not, ultimately, sufficiently *rational*.  Some philosophers (often followers of Hume but not necessarily Hume himself) think that morality is a not rational domain but a domain of sentiments, desires, commitments, approvals, and so on. Other philosophers (often followers of Kant) think that morality is a rational domain and hence must be a matter of identifying first principles and \'93applying\'94 them to particular situations. But what they share in common is a belief that \'93rationality must be explicable in terms of being guided by a formulable universal principle.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] This common belief McDowell wishes to refute. [In @macintyre1984does. MacIntyre argues a similar point. In this essay, he denies the assumption that normative ethical rules can be derived from universal ethical principles the way we \'93apply\'94 universal logical truths to particular logical conclusions via a middle term.]  \
\
McDowell\'92s discussion here (drawing on Wittgenstein and others) is hard to follow. The point seems to be that even apparently obvious cases where the rational thing to do is to follow an objective rule (say, by extending a series of numbers) turn out to be cases of a much messier process in which there is no such objective rule by appeal to which we can explain rational thoughts or behaviors. If Bob instructs Charlie to \'93add 2\'94 to a number and continue applying the rule indefinitely, we tend to be confident Charlie will produce \'932, 4, 6, 8,\'94 etc., which will \'93churn out the appropriate behavior with the sort of reliability which a physical mechanism, say a piece of clockwork, might have.\'94 We postulate a \'93psychological mechanism, underlying his behavior, by an inference analogous to that whereby one might hypothesize a physical structure underlying the observable motions of some inanimate object.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 337] The \'93ground and nature of our confidence\'94 that we will reliably apply rules is not but a common form of life. The \'91form of life\'92 is a term of art here from Wittgenstein (and quoted with approval from Stanley Cavell) that refers to that difficult-to-define process by which we learn how reliably to use words in our native language, how to make exclamations like a pained \'93ow!\'94 or an excited \'93ooh!\'94, when to laugh at jokes, and when to cry in pity. Our shared rationality, McDowell suggests, is not grounded in \'93external\'94 objective rules but in a shared form of life or what he calls a \'93congruence of subjectivities\'94.[@mcdowell1979virtue 339] McDowell admits this is a disconcerting hypothesis; it induces \'93vertigo.\'94 But, our response to such vertigo should not be to embrace a \'93consoling myth\'94. That myth he says is the two notions that (a) rule-following is a psychological mechanism that \'97 absent mistakes \'97 guarantees consistency, and that there exist objective facts of the matter over and above the congruence of subjectivities. If we abandon these two notions and embrace the model of deductive rationality as grounded only in our intersubjective form of life, then the corresponding model of practical rationality will become tenable. \
\
3. The question of how to live must be approached from "within" a moral outlook and approached "*via* the notion of a virtuous person"[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] \
\
McDowell\'92s solution to the problem of the vertigo we feel when contemplating the dependence of our rational concept-application on nothing more than our shared form of life is to simply accept that we cannot think from a third-person, detached, \'93sideways on\'94 point of view; we can only think from within our point of view. His main opponent, of course, is the notion that morality can be adduced from an objective third-person sort of view. He says, \'93The cure for the vertigo, then, is to give up on the idea that philosophical thought, about the sorts of practice in question, should be undertaken at some external standpoint, outside our immersion in our familiar forms of life.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 341] This is part of the movement toward his thesis that that virtues are ethical qualities that only make sense \'91from within\'92, that they lend a certain kind of perceptive ability to their bearers. \
\
McDowell points out the familiar case of a discussion or disagreement that end at loggerheads, with both parties asking "But don't you see?" Although it is tempting to want to resolve such loggerheads by appeal to a third-personal point of view standing outside either of our forms of life, McDowell thinks it must be resolved, if at all, from firmly within our form of life. That is not to say that persuasion is not possible. He reassures us that the "Don't you see?" question "can often be supplemented with words aimed at persuasion."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342] Rather, persuasion will consist in "bring[ing] someone to see it as one wants", in one or both parties appreciating reasons they may not have seen before. It sometimes takes efforts to make someone see (to make oneself or others see) "the right way to handle a given situation."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342]\
\
Now, if virtue knowledge is not codifiable then how is it *consistent*? What guarantees that the moral person\'92s behavior is intelligibly the same from case to case? On the one hand, if moral knowledge is rational then it is consistent from case to case and situation to situation; but if, as McDowell has been arguing, both deductive reasoning and practical reasoning are not merely consistent by being like a rule-following machine or computer, how do we explain the virtuous person's reliably correct behavior? Section 5 of the article answers this question by way of Aristotle's practical syllogisms.\
\
The 'practical syllogism' takes the following shape: \
\
1. X is good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. (E.g., it is good to instantiate justice in the classroom).\
2. Z would be X. (E.g., giving everyone a chance to re-take a quiz that was unavailable due to technical problems would be instantiate justice in my classroom.)\
3. Therefore, Z would be good to do, desirable, worthwhile, etc. \
\
On the strictly deductive logical model, the role of the major premise is to provide rock solid universal ethical principles from which to derive particular moral duties. But McDowell resists this model. On the strictly non-cognitivist model, without universal ethical principles we are left with universal psychological states (consistent desires, plans, values, or norms). McDowell also resists this. On the non-codifiable model, what does the major premise do? Its role, he says, is to state a "certain conception of how to live... [namely] the *virtuous person's conception* of the sort of life a human being should lead."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343. Emphasis added.] It is clear upon reflection that this account is a sort of circular reasoning. For the virtuous person's conception of how to live is itself conditioned by what he called earlier 'the moral outlook'. That conception of how to live, in turn, conditions what particular saliences are noticed (what minor premises) and generates practical conclusions about what is to be done. What kind of life should a human being lead? The answer "cannot be definitively written down."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] Furthermore, "Any attempt to capture it in words will recapitulate the character of the teaching whereby it might be instilled: generalizations will be approximate at best..."[@mcdowell1979virtue 343] The upshot of the combination of non-codifiability with a practical syllogistic form is that the virtuous person takes for a rule of life some conception of how to live but that this conception is part of what it means to be a virtuous person. (Hence the vertigo.)\
\
We might wonder why we are bothering about formal syllogistic reasoning at this point. But this way of understanding the practical syllogism *does* do good job of providing a plausible explanation of moral motivation (reasons one might act in some way) and moral behavior (reasons one acted that way). To paraphrase McDowell: "Explanations of judgments about what to do are explanations of actions."[@mcdowell1979virtue 342. Verbatim, he says: "The explanations, so far treated as explanations of judgments about what to do, are equally explanations of actions."] I can explain your behavior by understanding that you were concerned for your friend\'92s welfare and reached out to help. Likewise, you can explain your decision to help by assuring me that you are concerned for your friend\'92s welfare. For McDowell, the general structure of the practical syllogism is useful. He says \'93the rationality of virtue\'85 is not demonstrable from an external standpoint.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 346]\
\
**Objection:** McDowell cites a common objection, familiarly attributed to Hume, that practical reasons by themselves cannot motivate \'97 that they need the presence of a conative mental state (such as a desire) as well. \'93Cognition and volition are distinct.\'94 Surely the virtuous person\'92s behavior is conditioned both by knowledge and their non-cognitive psychological states. In McDowell\'92s example, one is aware that one\'92s friend is in trouble and that the friend is able to be comforted (the cognitive bit) and a desire (or motivation or inclination or settled passion) for helping one\'92s friends (the non-cognitive bit). Surely these two *together* and neither in isolation explains the behavior. \
\
The problem with this objection is that, as McDowell has plausibly argued, an essential component of the awareness that one\'92s friend is in trouble is the very sensitivity that is virtue. The difference between the vicious and virtuous person lies not just in their desires and reactions to what they notice about the world but in the noticing itself. Furthermore, McDowell points out, this non-cognitivist makes use of the deductive model of practical reasoning he has been at pains to deflate. \
\
**Objection:** To be rational, a genuine reason must be verifiable from an external, \'93neutral standpoint\'94 open to any rational observer whatsoever. Surely *something*, such as scientific or deductive logical beliefs, are objective in the sense that they look the same to any rational being whatsoever. \
\
Even here, McDowell undermines the objection as based partly in \'93vertigo\'94. It is a \'93craving for a kind of rationality independently demonstrable as such.\'94[mcdowell1979virtue 346] He admits that the intelligibility and consistency of the virtuous person\'92s way of life are an \'93orectic state\'94 but not that it is a straightforward desire as much as \'93a conception of how to live.\'94\
\
Although McDowell sees another more \'93subtle non-cognitivism\'94 arising from the ashes, he does not fully develop it. Rather, he says he suspects \'93that its origin is a philistine scientism, probably based on the misleading idea that the right of scientific method to rational acceptance is discernible from a more objective standpoint than that from which we seem to perceive the saliences. A scientistic conception of reality is eminently open to dispute. When we ask the metaphysical question whether reality is what science can find out about, we cannot, without begging the question, restrict the materials for an answer to those which science can countenance.\'94[@mcdowell1979virtue 346]\
\
\
\
### Summary\
\
McDowell argues that rational virtue is a kind of knowledge \'97 a kind of sensitivity \'97 against the objection that rational virtue is either a type of universalizable, objective, deductive logic or else non-cognitive. His rebuttal is to deny that deductive reasoning is so objective. Rather, deductive reasoning is not rule-following, except in that we follow a vague collection of rules associated by our common forms of life. We only know deduction, too, from within. So moral reasoning, he avers, we also know from within, by doing it, while doing it, because of our common forms of life. He does not much advance a view of virtue beyond the Aristotelian notion that virtues are qualities of reliable good-choosing, good-acting. He does however limit Aristotle\'92s optimism about the metaphysical realist assumptions underlying an understanding of deductive reason and practical reason. \
\
\
## Alasdair MacIntyre: Rational Tradition\
\
Let's consider MacIntyre\'92s widely influential view, that the great moral confusion of our time is due, in part, to the fracturing of social and political bonds deriving from a shared understanding of and pursuit of the good.^[Though he is classified as a "virtue ethicist", MacIntyre rejects the label insofar as it does not necessitate a real restoration of the Aristotelian tradition of virtue. Nevertheless, he has contributed to virtue ethics, as well as a surprising number of other fields: the history of philosophy, political science, epistemology, the philosophy of education, sociology, and more.] \
\
### Initial account\
\
MacIntyre's concept of virtue is derived from (but not limited to) a careful study of the history of the concept within the broader western tradition. In order to capture all of the (sometimes opposing) features of virtue from Homer to Jane Austen, MacIntyre unfolds three stages: the first is virtues relative to "practices." The second is virtues relative to the whole of an integrated human life. The third phase is virtue related to tradition and rationality.^[ Now, for MacIntyre "tradition" is almost synonymous to rationality. He calls it "tradition-constituted rationality". We will examine that notion in the next chapter.]\
\
The first stage is that virtues are \'93acquired human qualities that enable their possessor to achieve those goods which are internal to practices."[@macintyre1984after 191] This is perhaps a puzzling definition. Let's examine it a bit more closely.\
\
First, he says virtues are acquired *human* qualities. Presumably, human qualities are opposed to analogous qualities of non-human animals. The flexible flagellum of a bacterium, the swiftness of a deer -- formal or functional biological features that enable an animal to survive and thrive -- are excluded from the class of virtues by definition. MacIntyre's later *Dependent Rational Animals* retracts the assumed divide between human and non-human animals. But here, virtues do not arise from nor depend on biology. In this, MacIntyre's initial formulation disagrees with Foot but agrees with McDowell, as we shall see. \
\
Secondly, virtues are *acquired* human qualities. This is an important point and relates to the first, for natural biological features are inborn. Virtues, rather, are acquired. This is no small matter. In the first line of Plato's *Meno*, Meno asks Socrates a question that moral philosophers have continued to try to answer for the last 2,400 years. He asks "whether virtue is acquired by teaching or by practice; or if neither by teaching nor practice, then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?"[@plato, *Meno* 70a] MacIntyre's answer is not that virtue is a gift of the gods, but that it is *acquired.* A recent volume edited by Mark Alfano[@alfano2015current] discusses the range of which positive traits count as virtues. MacIntyre, it would seem, sides with those who limit the range to exclude inborn or genetically determined qualities like a good memory or excellent eyesight from being considered virtues. That is not to say that virtues are *not natural*. In one sense of the word 'natural', virtues are proper to human beings without being, so to speak, "automatic." In this, he agrees with Aristotle that virtue is *in accordance with* nature but not *by nature*.  Rather, virtuous traits are a "normal" psychological outgrowth of cultivating excellence within particular human practices. \
\
Thirdly, virtues enable their possessor to achieve particular *goods.* This clause assumes that virtues are beneficial. A virtuous trait *cannot* be directed at achieving ills. This assumption will bring some trouble for MacIntyre's initial definition in *After Virtue*. Can't overall wicked people have particular virtues? Can't the thief be courageous, the dictator magnanimous, the glutton affable? It certainly seems that the answer is yes. Even indexing virtues to practices does not solve the problem; can practices be wicked? I shall discuss this problem in next sub-sections.\
\
Fourthly, since virtues "enable their possessor to achieve ... goods", it may seem that virtue are mere *instruments* to goods, not goods themselves. A grave misunderstanding lurks in the vicinity. Virtues *are* instrumental for MacIntyre, but they are not *merely* instrumental. They are both instrumental (to the achievement of certain goods) and also *partly constitutive of those goods.* Virtues are both means to an end and also ends in themselves.^[*Phronesis* or practical wisdom, for example, enables agents to make good decisions that result in human flourishing but having *phronesis* *just is part of what it means* to flourish qua human.] Now, this conflation of means and ends is liable to worry some critics. The worry is not trivial; however, for the sake of completing my presentation of virtue, I must set it aside for now.\
\
MacIntyre's philosophical methodology is exemplified in how he defines \'91virtue\'92. He begins with Homeric virtues (roughly, the performance of one\'92s social role) and works through the implicit or explicit definitions of virtue in Plato, Aristotle, the Greek tragic poets, the New Testament, Aquinas, Jane Austen, and Benjamin Franklin. While respecting the different definitions and examples, he creatively abstracts an account that unifies them all. His definition is historical but not restricted to history; it aims to be universal but does not pretend to be purely abstract. His concept of virtue is, rather, *traditional*. Furthermore, as we shall see, MacIntyre's view of 'tradition' is not conservative but progressive, not oriented toward the past but the future. \
\
### First Stage: Practice ###\
\
What are "*practices*"? Practice is a key term of art; to misunderstand it would be to misunderstand MacIntyre. A practice is a social activity aimed at defined ends. (We commonly speak of "practicing" medicine in this sense.) MacIntyre mentions farming, chess, and political activity, among other examples.  A practice is not merely a reflexive action (like scratching an itch) nor merely a single, discrete, intelligible action (like pulling a weed); it is an intelligible set of actions. The farmer is engaged in a series of activities, from tilling, sowing, watering, protecting, harvesting, storing, etc., all of which are embedded within a social context and organized around a particular goal. Each practice has a history, a set of practitioners, a common set of standards, and a common goal. And virtues are those qualities that enable their possessor to excel in practices. \
\
For example, secondary school education is a social activity that teachers undertake in order to give children the basic knowledge and skills they need to transition to functional adults in society, whether by getting a job, starting a business, or advancing to higher stages of education.^[Secondary education has other (perhaps de facto) purposes, like to socialize young people in a community of peers and authorities, and to afford them opportunities for recreation, art, clubs, to give parents a break, and so on. For the sake of simplicity, I shall focus on what seems to me the primary goal of education, which is education (in knowledge) and training (in skills) needed for becoming a legal adult.]  Secondary education in the U.S. is a practice with a history (or a set of histories) from the present time back to when Americans completing high school (rather than beginning work on a farm or in town by the age of 16) was the exception rather than the rule. It has standards, both legal standards and "best practices" passed from mentor to student teacher. It pretty obviously has standards of excellence according to which most educators are average, some poor, and some excellent. An educator who wants to join that profession will be enculturated with that history, taught those standards, and given a chance (usually by trial and error) to become a good teacher. \
\
Leading MacIntyre scholar, Christopher Lutz, highlights four aspects of MacIntyre's famous definition of practice. A practice is: \
\
>[1] a complex social activity that [2] enables participants to gain goods internal to the practice. [3] Participants achieve excellence in practices by gaining the internal goods. When participants achieve excellence, [4] the social understandings of excellence in the practice, of the goods of the practice, and of the possibility of achieving excellence in the practice are systematically extended.[@lutz2015] \
\
I believe my example of high school education illustrates Lutz' explication of MacIntyre's definition of 'practice.' [1] Practices are inherently complex *social* activities in that teachers cannot be teachers without students, and (usually) do not teach in isolation but in community with colleagues and administrators and parents. [2] Secondary education qua practice enables teachers to gain the goods "internal to the practice", namely students who are educated enough to be ready for legal adulthood -- for a job or college. [3] Good teachers are those that demonstrate the ability reliably to produce, against all odds, educated students. And [4] good schools and good teachers usually have a *history* and social context that is being "extended" across generations. Good schools recruit and train good teachers, good teachers train the next generation of good teachers, and so on. \
\
Also, he defines virtues with reference to goods *"internal to"* practices. What is the internal/external relation doing? MacIntyre later refashions the contrast between 'internal' and 'external' goods into one between 'goods of excellence' and 'goods of effectiveness.' I prefer the latter terminology. But the point is, I think, clear. The goods of excellence just are those that necessarily contribute to success within a given practice as such. In secondary education, success is defined by graduate rates, student retention of information, high test scores, high acceptance rates to top colleges, low drug use, low teenage pregnancy, and so on. The profession-specific virtues needed include understanding (to stay patient with struggling students), affability (to keep rapport), articulateness (to present material effectively), and so on. More general virtues needed include honesty, integrity, courage, faithfulness, and so on. Without these, *teaching* may be possible but *teaching well* is impossible. \
\
By contrast, goods of effectiveness are those that might fit with the practice but are not *necessary* for achieving the end of that practice: high pay, an excellent teacher lounge, a short commute to work, and so on. Mere efficiency in attaining such external goods does not entail the presence of a virtue. In fact, the desire to pursue such goods *instead of* the goods of excellence is not a neutral desire \'97 it is a *temptation.* Virtues are needed to overcome those temptations and to succeed according to the standards of the practice itself.^[To illustrate the temptation goods of effectiveness might pose, we need only think about political activity. Some (I suppose) become politicians *in order to bring about* the survival, security, and prosperity of the *polis*; others engage in order merely to satisfy their own ambition or achieve fame. Often we see American politicians running for office only one apparent aim: book sales.]\
\
### Second Stage: Whole Life\
\
The second stage depends on the notions of a complete human life, the sum of all the practices of one\'92s life.[@macintyre1984after, chapter 15] He says that "without an overriding conception of the telos of a whole human life, conceived as a unity, our conception of certain individual virtues has to remain partial and incomplete."[@macintyre1984after 202] The example given shows how justice demands an ordering of the various goods of excellence within each practice. MacIntyre undermines the notion that the virtues which enable success in practices can be sufficient for an account of virtue in general. He argues that we need to "envisage each human life as a whole, as a unity, whose character provides the virutes with an adequate telos."[@macintyre1984after 204] \
\
Despite the obstacles to such a vision, it is possible. The obstacles MacIntyre cites are both "social and philosophical." The social obstacle is the fragmentation of modern life: "work is divided from leisure, private life from public, the corporate from the personal. So both childhood and old age have been wrenched away from the rest of human life and made over into distinct realms."[@macintyre1984after 204] Just as the temporal segments of life are fragmented into bits (one thinks of the inherently patronizing talk of "senior citizens" compared from the older, inherently reverent talk of "elders"), so also the various projects and pursuits of life are partitioned, labelled, and cordoned off. On this fragmented view of life, the self's social roles are so many conventions masking the "true" underlying nature of the self. This presents a puzzle: how could virtues arise to the level of excellent dispositions for *humans as such*? They would have to be dispositions applicable in personal, private, business, spheres, in young and middle and old age, etc. \
\
The second and philosophical obstacle is the tendency to atomize "complex actions... in terms of simple components."[@macintyre1984after 204] MacIntyre's argument here is highly significant. He begins by analyzing the way we might answer a simple question such as: "what is he doing?" \
\
>One and the same segment of human behavior may be correctly characterized in a number of different ways. To the question 'What is he doing?' the answers may with equal truth and appropriateness be 'Digging', 'Gardening', 'Taking exercise', 'Preparing for winter' or 'Pleasing his wife'.[@macintyre1984after 206] \
\
The first fact to notice is that each of these answers picks out different aspects of the agent's action: intentions, intended consequences, unintended consequences, etc. And, importantly, each of these answers places the simple atomic action within a narrative history: situated in an "annual cycle of domestic activity", in a hobby, in a marriage, and so on -- each with its own history and "setting." The second fact to notice is that the answers to a similarly simple question "Why is he writing a sentence?" might be situated in different time horizons: immediately, he is writing to finish his book; but also he is contributing to a philosophical debate; but also he is trying to get tenure.[@macintyre1984after 207] The upshot of these reflections is that individual actions, abstracted from their context are only intelligible if they are "ordered both causally and temporally... the correct identification of the agent's beliefs will be an essential constituent of this task."[@macintyre1984after 208] MacIntyre's astonishing conclusion from these innocuous premises is that "there is no such thing as 'behavior', to be identified prior to and independently of intentions, beliefs and settings... Narrative history of a certain kind turns out to be the basic and essential genre for the characterization of human actions."[@macintyre1984after 208]\
\
This argument builds to a conclusion that Stanley Hauerwas asserts is "the central contention in After Virtue is his remark that \'93the concept of an intelligible action is a more fundamental concept than that of an action.\'94[@macintyre1984after 209] \
\
Hauerwas continues: \
\
> This may seem a small philosophical point, but much revolves around it: His understandings of the centrality of practical reason, the significance of the body for agency, why the teleological character of our lives must be displayed through narrative, the character of rationality, the nature of the virtues, why training in a craft is paradigmatic of learning to think as well as live, his understanding of why the Enlightenment project had to fail, his particular way of being a historicist, and why the plain person is the necessary subject of philosophy.[@hauerwas2007]\
\
Actions such as practicioners perform in practices find their intelligibility not only in practices but in the narrative of a whole human life. The same is true for verbal contributions to a conversation. Each turn people take in speaking to each other contributes to an unfolding narrative with a history and a telos, without which statements are random and unintelligible. MacIntyre continues:\
\
>But if this is true of conversations, it is true also mutatis mutandis of bat- tles, chess games, courtships, philosophy seminars, families at the dinner table, businessmen negotiating contracts- that is, of human transactions in general. For conversation, understood widely enough, is the form of human transactions in general. Conversational behavior is not a special sort or aspect of human behavior, even though the forms of language-using and of human life are such that the deeds of others speak for them as much as do their words. For that is possible only because they are the deeds of those who have words.[@macintyre1984after 211]\
\
MacIntyre's discussion of narrative is highly interesting but can be left aside.^[Consider such fascinating statements as: "man is in his actions and practice, as well as in his fictions, essentially a story-telling animal. He is not essentially, but becomes through his history, a teller of stories that aspire to truth. But the key question for men is not about their own authorship; I can only answer the question 'What am I to do?' if I can answer the prior question 'Of what story or stories do I find myself a part?'"] For we have arrived at a the supports needed for building the second stage of his account of virtue: the unity of many practices into a single whole. He says: "The unity of a human life is the unity of a narrative quest."[@macintyre1984after 219]\
\
Naturally, to be on a quest is to strive for a goal, even if one fails to reach the goal. The goal, he says, is to quest for "*the* good" (as one understands it at the beginning of the quest). But the conception of *the* good can grow or morph along the way. How do the virtues relate to this quest? \
\
>"The virtues therefore are to be understood as those dispositions which will not only sustain practices and enable us to achieve the goods internal to practices. but which will also sustain us in the relevant kind of quest for the good. by enabling us to overcome the harms, dangers, temptations and distractions which we encounter, and which will furnish us with increasing self-knowledge and increasing knowledge of the good. The catalogue of the virtues will therefore include the virtues required to sustain the kind of households and the kind of political communities in which men and women can seek for the good together and the virtues necessary for philosophical enquiry about the character of the good."[@macintyre1984after 220]\
\
Virtues "sustain" practices from normal temptations; but virtues also help us to coordinate various practices and pursuits into a coherent quest to live our lives well. Virtues also sustain the relationships with friends, family, fellow citizens, and strangers within which we pursue our goal. \
\
### Third stage: Tradition\
\
MacIntyre's third stage of his virtue account situates what has come before in a broader social and historical context. That context he simply calls 'tradition.' In MacIntyre's account, we must be careful not to import our various connotations and prejudices for or against 'tradition'.  \
\
>We are apt to be misled here by the ideological uses to which the concept of a tradition has been put by conservative political theorists. Characteristically such theorists have followed Burke in contrasting tradition with reason and the stability of tradition with conflict. Both contrasts obfuscate.[@macintyre1984after 222]\
\
Rather, a tradition is a something like a culture: "A living tradition then is an historically extended, socially embodied argument". \
\
>Lack of justice, lack of truthfulness. lack of courage. lack of the relevant intellectual virtues--these corrupt traditions, just as they do those institutions and practices which derive their life from the traditions of which they are the contemporary embodiments. \
\
While we shall pick up MacIntyre's highly contentious concept of tradition in a later chapter, here it will be worth underscoring a few key points. \
\
Tradition is not a panacea against political tension and turmoil. Quite the contrary: political tensions of a particular character and expression are instrinsic to MacIntyre tradition. As he defines tradition, the internal conflict is a necessary feature: "A living tradition then is an historically extended, socially embodied argument, and an argument precisely in part about the goods which constitute that tradition."[@macintyre1984after 222] \
\
Nor is tradition a rival to reason and critical reflection. Rather, one learns to reason -- to critically reflect -- within a MacIntyrean tradition. It is a truism that one learns language within a culture. It is equally true that one learns facts and methods of reasoning within a tradition, conceived as a community of thinkers who share not only a common tongue but common concepts and a repertoire of facts, beliefs, customs, etc. So, rather than tradition being opposed to reason, tradition is the first source of our reasoning. And rather than tradition being opposed to critical reflection, tradition is the first source of the habit of critically reflecting. The very ability to expand the repertoire of facts or modify the methods of thinking depends upon the awareness that one inhabits a tradition. This awareness MacIntyre even elevates to the level of a virtue, saying it is "one whose importance is perhaps most obvious when it is least present." What is that virtue?\
\
>the virtue of having an adequate sense of the traditions to which one belongs or which confront one. This virtue is not to be confused with any form of conservative antiquarianism; I am not praising those who choose the conventional conservative role of *laudator temporis act*;. It is rather the case that an adequate sense of tradition manifests itself in a grasp of those future possibilities which the past has made available to the present. Living traditions, just because they continue a not-yet-completed narrative, confront a future whose determinate and determinable character, so far as it possesses any, derives from the past.[@macintyre1984after 223]\
\
This is all we shall say about tradition here. But we must return to it in a later chapter. For MacIntyre, rationality itself is tradition-constituted.  So insofar as practical rationality is the differentium of human nature, and insofar as virtues all depend for their effective operation on the coordinating management of practical reason, tradition will again become an essential concept. \
\
Virtues are qualities that enable the health and persistence of traditions. A tradition is an extended argument, in part about the goods that constitute that tradition and the terms of that argument. Virtues as related to practices are individual but not individualistic, since practices themselves are social activities. Virtues as related to the whole of life are cultural but not culturally relativistic, for every culture ought to provide for its members some minimal goods. \
\
\
## Compare, Contrast, Synthesize\
\
What MacIntyre is missing is a full account of humanity as not just a social being but a biological being. We are animals. We are rational animals but animals just the same. Similarly, McDowell is missing a clear accounting of the relation between second nature and nature. (Rationality will be the main theme in a later chapter.) By locating the activity of evaluating solely in human nature's inhabitation of the space of reasons, he has divorced humanity from the world. As Julia Annas summarizes, non-reductive naturalisms risk trivializing moral or normative facts by implausibly cordoning them within humans:"Non-naturalistic accounts of ethical terms assume that their function, prominently their normativity, is something that arises with humans, or is produced by humans, in a way which owes nothing to the nature which we share with other living things."[@annas2005naturalism 12] \
\
That link is supplied by Foot (and Thompson et. al.) As Julia Annas says: \
\
>What is so helpful for ethics from this kind of biological naturalism is that we find that the normativity of our ethical discourse is not something which emerges mysteriously with humans and can only be projected back, in an anthropomorphic way, onto trees and their roots. Rather, we find normativity in the realm of living things, plants and animals, already. It is part of the great merit of the work of Philippa Foot and Rosalind Hursthouse to have stressed this point. Like many important philosophical points, it is obvious once pointed out\'85[@annas2005naturalism]\
\
By arguing (rightly I think) that the moral outlook can only be ratified from *within the moral outlook*, McDowell has cut off a range of reasonable supports to the moral outlook that can be drawn from "outside." We *can* draw from other natural objects (via generics or Aristotelian categoricals) notions such as "health" and "sickness", "exemplary" and "defective". \
\
At the same time, Foot's account is lacking in some respects that McDowell and MacIntyre can supply. What Foot is missing is an account of human virtue and  rationality in society and tradition. The virtues are not just beneficial to human beings tout court, unmediated by tradition. The human experience unmediated by tradition does not exist. To be a human being is, as McDowell rightly says, to participate in *Bildung*, a process of formation in which a person with language, thoughts, beliefs, desires, evaluative judgments, etc. are (at least initially) the product. \
\
I would now like to turn to some remaining puzzles or objections about virtue that might make this account of virtue less plausible. \
\
## How many virtues? \
\
Virtues are those excellent traits that humans as practical reasoners need to realize our natural telos. And, we have argued, human nature is an intelligibly determinate concept: rational animals. Still, we might wonder how many virtues there are? It seems that our neo-Aristotelian writers vary widely on this point, from one, to a limited set, to a virtually unlimited set. \
\
Foot (and Geach) takes for examples the four "cardinal" virtues which are delivered by tradition. (Hursthouse also defends the "theological virtue" of hope and Geach defends even a kind of faith as non-theological virtues. Nevertheless, Geach argues that love can only be a religious virtue.)[@hursthouse1998virtue chapter 11; @geach1977virtues chapter 4.]\
\
McDowell's account makes it seem like there is only one virtue (knowledge). Each individual virtue is \'93a sort of perceptual capacity\'94, a \'93specialized sensitivity\'94 to a particular range of reasons for action (say, the feelings of others), and all virtue is sensitivity to reasons. There is only one "moral outlook."[@mcdowell1979virtue 332] \
\
MacIntyre, by contrast, not only includes in his broad historical list the virtues of Homer, Plato, Aristotle, the Greek tragic poets, the New Testament, Aquinas, Jane Austen, Benjamin Franklin, and Jane Austin, but he adds (apparently ad lib) new virtues like "integrity or constancy"[@macintyre1984after 203. "There is at least one virtue recognized by the [Aristotelian] tradition which cannot be specified at all except with reference to the wholeness of a human life -- the virtue of integrity or constancy."] and "an adequate sense of tradition"[@macintyre1984after 223] \
\
Aristotle's list of virtues includes twelve moral virtues.^[1. Courage in the face of fear; 2. Temperence in the face of pleasure and pain; 3. Liberality with wealth and possessions; 4. Mangifience with great wealth and possessions; 5. Magnanimity with great honor; 6. Proper ambition with normal honors; 7. Patience in the face of irritation; 8. Truthfulness with self-expression; \
9. Wittiness in conversation; 10. Friendliness in social conduct; 11. Modesty in the face of shame or shamelessness; 12. Righteous indignation. He adds five intellectual virtues.] He builds into the definition of some of the virtues (e.g., magnanimity) the notion that not *all* human beings as such require it (since not all are extremely wealthy public servants). \
\
Is there any sense to be made here? If human nature is stable, yet human reason is flexible enough to admit of variation (both progressive and regressive), then we ought to expect a stable set of qualities that count as virtues that is flexible enough to admit of variation. \
\
The \'91cardinal\'92 or classical virtues to which those in the Aristotelian tradition (including recent neo-Aristotelians) give preeminent place are courage, justice, moderation, and practical wisdom. The four cardinal virtues are not only "delivered by tradition" but can be most easily ratified by anyone willing to do the critical analysis. \
\
Roughly, justice is every member of the community doing their business and each person giving and receiving his due. Since every human being exists in society, the presence or absence of justice in the members of the community will sustain or destroy that community. \
\
Courage is the proper boldness in doing the right thing despite opposition. Courage is not simply a military virtue appropriate to police officers, firefighters, telephone wire repairmen, etc. \
\
Moderation is pursuing the right amount of pleasure in the right way at the right time, and avoiding the wrong amount and the wrong way and the wrong time. The dangers to health and happiness of excessive pleasure are obvious to anyone who has had the (mis)fortune to earn or inherit enough time and money to overindulge. Many celebrities who have worked their way to the top of the entertainment industry find that they \
\
Practical wisdom is excellence in knowing what to do in a given situation.Practical wisdom is I think rightly the most important virtue in the sense that it is a hub from which the other virtues emerge as spokes. Even the theroetical or intellectual virtues Zagzebski writes about[@zagzebski1996virtues] depend for their cultivation on a person willing to invest the time and energy into theoretical learning. But I shall return to this theme in a later chapter. \
\
Beyond these, our definition of virtue is flexible enough to include a variety of positive character traits. Strictly speaking, however, the core virtues are those *all human beings need* since they benefit people along the lowest common denominator. We might call 'virtues' those positive traits that are appropriate for various life stations, ages, genders, professions, social roles, and so on. But if we are being strict such traits (regardless of how we label them) will be sharply distinguished from the cardinal virtues.  They are the base of a triangle. \
\
## Are virtues inborn?\
\
These qualities are acquirable. Not everyone has equal opportunity to acquire them \'97 moral education is helpful; virtuous parents and teachers are helpful; social conditions wherein vice will not be gratuitously rewarded or virtues gratuitously punished are helpful. Yet every human being has equal responsibility to acquire them. \
\
They are, it seems necessary for success in any worthwhile human endeavor. Most people in the world will not write books or even read many books; however, every human being in the world has biological parents and hence has family. Every living human being belongs to a community; even orphans and street urchins live in a community. \
\
## Is the pursuit of virtue egoistic? \
\
Supposing that virtues *benefit their possessor*, is it then egoistic or selfish to pursue virtue? Although it seems we only need virtue if we want to be happy, everyone has an obligation to develop virtuous traits because virtues help us become who we are. Such a pursuit is not selfish in the pejorative sense of the word; it is not 'egoism' for the charge of egoism assumes that the good for men is not *the good* per se. \
\
\
\
## Questions for future chapters\
\
The remaining questions about virtue must be pursued in future chapters. I would like to queue them up here. \
\
\
\
### What is human flourishing? \
\
Virtues effect human flourishing. So what is human flourishing? \
\
Although it seems to be merely pleasure or worldly success, and though I shall define it more later, I mean generally "well-being", true happiness, human success as such.  \
\
\
### Are the virtues human or cultural? \
\
Virtues must be derived from human nature and exemplify excellence in human nature. But still must all such human actions and excellence be mediated by culture, by "second nature"? \
\
Although it seems they are cultural, they are 'human traits' in that they express human nature. MacIntyre does not basis virtue enough in metaphysical biology; Foot bases it too much in metaphysical biology; McDowell bases virtue in reason but does not explain the relation of reason to metaphysical biology. Foot is closest to my view, but I supplement her view with arguments to the effect that normativity (including teleology) is built-in to nature as a whole, not just humanity. \
\
      This is a point we attempted to justify in the foregoing chapter. And we shall return to it in the discussion of practical rationality. \
\
### Can virtues be put to bad use? \
\
Virtues are necessarily good for human beings as such. But some of the qualities the moral tradition picks out as virtues can be conceived as being put to bad use. So can virtues remain virtues while in bad use? \
\
Although it seems that virtuous traits cannot be put to bad use, some virtues admit of misuse since the absence of practical wisdom renders traits (like moderation) that really are virtues ineffective at the realization of our human telos. \
\
This will require a discussion of practical wisdom. \
\
### Can the virtuous person be irrational? \
\
Relatedly, virtues are supposed to be actions "in accord" with reason and in accord with human nature. This suggests that the virtuous person cannot be irrational. \
\
Although it seems that the virtuous person can be irrational, the virtuous person is by definition rational either (in the primary sense) by reflectively endorsing their own reasons for action in every or almost every significant life pursuit or (in a derivative but no less real sense) by acting in accordance with good reasons, either on good advice from another or on their own, unreflective, habitual, reasons. \
\
Practical wisdom, then, has pride of place. There are other virtues besides practical wisdom; Socrates was wrong there. And Maggie Little is wrong to suggest that virtue is knowledge *and nothing more*.[@little2007virtue. It is not totally clear to me from this essay whether she means to suggest this point or not; but the suggestion is there and she does nothing to counteract it.] But it is correct that wisdom has pride of place. Courage without wisdom ceases even to be courage. \
\
This will also require a discussion of practical wisdom. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
#Virtue as Excellence of Practical Reason\
\
\'93It is evident that it is impossible to be practically wise without being good.\'94 (*Nicomachean Ethics*, 1144a, 36\'9637). \
\
\'93What a wise man knows, therefore, is how to construct a pattern that, given the human situation, is likely to lead to a good life.\'94 (Keyes 1983, 280)\
\
## Summary\
\
**Chapter 4. Virtue as excellence of practical reason, practical wisdom.** The third chapter presents an account of practical reason according to which practical wisdom (the excellence of practical reason) is a necessary condition of all the other virtues. Questions I aim to answer include: what is practical reason and what is excellence in regard to it?[@foot2001natural, chapter 4; @mcdowell1979virtue]  Can moral reasons satisfy the "practical requirement" with regard to morality? Is practical reason egoistic or can we undermine the distinction between 'self-regarding' and 'other-regarding' virtues[@slote1995agent], between self-love and conscience?[@annas2009egoism; @macintyre1967egoism; @bloomfield2012eudaimonia; @huang2010self] Are the deliverances of practical reasoning subjective, intersubjective, or objective? Are we rational? What about *akrasia*? What is foolishness? Is it relative to cultures? How do we keep reason objective but liberal, plural but not anarchic. The good is true but even first we pursue truth because it is good. The value of truth.\
\
## Introduction \
\
### The centrality of practical rationality\
\
Practical reason occupies a a place of importance in virtue ethics. Many of the recent neo-Aristotelian virtue ethicists have thematized practical reason (or practical rationality, which I shall use synonymously). \
\
So why is our faculty for thinking what to do and the quality that some people have of being excellent at knowing what to do so important for virtue ethicists? \
\
The first reason, alluded to the prior chapter, is that rationality in part defines our nature. We are animals of a particular sort: rational animals. We identify ourselves (scientifically, philosophically, religiously, anthropologically, psychologically) as creatures normally capable of language, abstract thought, argumentation, mathematics, philosophy, natural science, and so on. \
\
A second reason is that we are not merely rational but also practical: we *practice*. One can concieve of rational creatures (gods, martians, angelic intelligences, artificial intelligences) that are not also "practical" creatures -- that do not practice anything. Douglas Adams's computer character Deep Thought is a *knower* with nothing to do. \
\
A third reason is, also alluded to, is that practical wisdom provides a needed corrective not only to folly but even to the possible excesses or misapplications of other virtues. The negative version of the same reason is the intuitive claim that (practical) folly has the potential to ruin otherwise admirable lives. \
\
A fourth reason is that practical wisdom is -- confusingly -- both a "moral virtue" and an "intellectual virtue". As Foot points out, out of the four Greek cardinal virtues (moderation, courage, justice, practical wisdom) only justice is obviously "moral" in our usual sense of "other-regarding" traits. Moderation, courage, and practical wisdom more smoothly fit into the "self-regarding" category; practical wisdom fits most smoothly of all into the category of virtues of mind. While there is a growing branch of intellectual virtue ethics within the budding virtue ethics tree, practical wisdom seems to partake of both qualities. The dual nature of practical wisdom is likely to be even easier to misunderstand than other traditional virtues. \
\
### Problems for this chapter\
\
1. Although it seems that reason cannot motivate, practical reasons are the *primary* meaning of "motive"; other psychological states *move* me to act but only reasons *motivate* me to act, since motivation is (I argue) a fundamentally rational state. \
2. Although it seems reason is instrumental, rational motives are inherently related to *ends* seen as good; the first principle of practical reason is "pursue the good".\
3. Although it seems that moral reasoning is the process of judging actions as right or wrong, or resolving moral dilemmas, or identifying a special property "goodness", moral reasoning is the business of pursuing what is worthwhile,  appraising action decide what to do. \
4. Although it seems "morality" is narrowly about how we treat others, it is about self- and other-regarding virtues.\
5. Although it seems that there are no other virtues because all virtue is knowledge, there are other virtues related to other cognitive and affective features of human nature, each of which, nevertheless, depends on and enhances practical reason. \
6. Although it seems that practical reason is universal and objective like logic; it is intersubjective like logic; nevertheless, it is objective; it can be universal across cultures and traditions.\
7. Although it seems practical reason is not natural, it is part of human nature (whether as endemic to human *nature*, not merely second nature, not necessarily supernatural, but primary nature because primary nature is logical or rational will be addressed later)\
\
\
\
## 1. Although it seems that reason cannot motivate, practical reasons are the *primary* meaning of motive.\
\
Other psychological states *move* me to act but only reasons *motivate* me to act, since motivation is (I argue) a fundamentally rational state. \
\
\
### \'93Character Ethics\'94\
\
Edmund Pincoffs distinguishes two broad conceptions of philosophical ethics he calls \'93Quandary Ethics\'94 and \'93Character Ethics.\'94 Quandary ethics is focused on the short-term resolution of immediate moral problems, either by dissolving moral perplexity or giving some (hopefully rational) basis for a particular decision or course of action; character ethics is focused on the long-term goal of living well by executing worthwhile goals in every day life. The Quandary ethicists are those Pincoffs quotes at the beginning of his article (such as Hare, Toulon, Brandt). They think that \'93the business of ethics is with " problems ", i.e. situations in which it is difficult to know what one should do; that the ultimate beneficiary of ethical analysis is the person who, in one of these situations, seeks rational ground for the decision he must make; that ethics is therefore primarily concerned to find such grounds, often conceived of as moral rules and the principles from which they can be derived; and that meta-ethics consists in the analysis of the terms, claims, and arguments which come into play in moral disputation, deliberation, and justification in problematic contexts.\'94[@pincoffs1971quandary 552] By contrast, Aristotle is an example of a Character Ethicist. \'94[Aristotle] as is well known, thought of ethics as a branch of politics, which in turn he thought of as a very wide-ranging subject having to do generally with the planning of human life so that it could be lived as well as possible. Moral problems are given their due but are by no means stage-centre. The question is not so much how we should resolve perplexities as how we should live."[@pincoffs1971quandary 553-4] The chapters constituting this ethical inquiry partake more of character ethics. How do we live *well*? This is the first question of life that human beings, upon arriving at the age of reflection, ask. It is also the first question of ethical philosophers. The goal is broad, to understand virtue, wisdom, and happiness with an eye to becoming virtuous, wise, and happy in spite of the odds and in spite of the temptations to vice and the inevitable distractions and obstacles of chance. \
\
### Non-distinctive virtue ethics Nussbaum\
\
Nussbaum rightly observes that the three features of \'93common ground\'94 between a wide variety of \'93virtue ethicists\'94 also include Kant and Mill and Sidgewick. Her three features are the notions that moral philosophy is (a) about the agent (not just individual choices or actions), (b) about motives, emotions, and settled character traits, and (c) the whole of life.[@nussbaum1999virtue 170] \'93Even though a concern for motive, intention, character, and the whole course of life was not in principle alien to Kantian and Utilitarian philosophy, it was certainly alien to most British and American Kantians and Utilitarians of the period.\'94[@nussbaum1999virtue 173] Martha Nussbaum argues that the \'93common ground\'94 between even diverging views is that we cannot construct a complete ethical theory by discussing only \'93isolated moments of choice\'94[@nussbaum1999virtue 174] \
\
This \'93common ground\'94 explains why virtue theorists often discuss examples from literature and why many virtue theorists are female philosophers or feminists. For  \'93literary narratives display longterm patterns of character, action, and commitment\'94 and females have \'93more often been encouraged by society to attend to, cultivate, and label their emotions.\'94[@nussbaum1999virtue 176]\
\
The \'93common ground\'94 does not imply the rejection of theorizing, nor of moral rules. Ancient and contemporary virtue theorists employ both. Nor does the \'93common ground\'94 imply the apotheosis of local custom and moral tradition. Reflective morality is supposed to rise above the raw material of one\'92s maxims and habits to trim and add. Nor does the \'93common ground\'94 imply that emotion and the sub-rational forces of tradition (she mentions \'93traditional pedagogues and astrologists and religious leaders and magicians\'94) are to be preferred to rational morality. \
\
The remaining virtue theorists, Nussbaum thinks,  fall into two diverse groups: the first consists of characteristically \'93anti-Utilitarians\'94 who want reason to play a much larger role than Mill (or the typical Utilitarian) would have it do; the second consists of characteristically \'93anti-Kantians\'94 and want sub-rational psychological states to play a much larger role than Kant (or the typical Kantian) would have them do. The first group defend the plurality of goods, rationality\'92s role in deliberating about which ends to pursue and its role in organizing, ranking, and harmonizing that plurality of goods, the rational character of some emotions, and the need for a rational critique of the broader social and political setting in which \'93defective passions and judgments\'94 are formed.[@nussbaum1999virtue 180]\
\
On the notion that values are plural, the anti-Utilitarians are united. Virtues are "an organized way of cherishing a particular end that has intrinsic value. Taken together, the virutes, and their orderly arrangement, represent a set of commitments to cherish all the valuable things, and to organize them all together, insofar as one can."[@nussbaum1999virtue 183] The "insofar" clause there is not insignificant. Religiously, the Greeks were deeply persuaded of the sometimes tragic and impossible task of pleasing all the gods. Ethically, they were likewise sensitive the sometimes tragic and impossible demand to pursue all intrinsic goods. One of the tasks of rational deliberation, Nussbaum, argues, is to organize this plurality of goods into a coherent set or to specify indeterminate ends into clear and pursuable ones. Ethicists who have supported this notion include Murdoch, McDowell and Sherman. While giving room to the passions, such Aristotelians elevate reason to a role that can have influence in shaping passions. She says they are "highly theoretical rationalists who would like reason to do much more than it currently does in perfecting our moral and political lives."[@nussbaum1999virtue 187] These are playfully chided as "Prussian" moralists who would not bathe in the sun without deliberating first whether doing so would be in accord with duty. \
\
One possible response here would be to make an analogy to parenting. Different parents discharge their duty to raise children in vastly different ways. Upper and middle-class and lower-class parents in the U.S. exhibit a vast range all by themselves, not to mention the parenting habits of various classes of various first-, second-, and third-world countries. One plausible underlying unity, however, is the thought that parents (and guardians more generally) treat children as sub-rational. From the ages of 0-1, children do not respond to speech; from 1-5 their speech is limited, and from 5-12 children are fully able to understand basic speech but are most often swept about by emotion, impulse, desire, and social instinct. Parenting habits may be roughly graphed then on a scale of more or less "Prussian" according to how strictly a parent schedules the time for the child's day. Some parents impose rigid form on a child's day, allowing pockets of "play time" in between dressing, eating, learning, practicing instruments, and so on; some parents allow children to run about freely throughout the day, only imposing small pockets of rigid time (at meals, before bed, etc.). We might plausibly suppose that the role of reason is more like that of a parent managing sub-rational children than it is like that of a monarch ruling a polis. \
\
The other "anti-Kantians" want reason to play *less* of a role -- or at least a different role -- in the moral life. Bernard Williams, she says, appreciated the Greek poets far more than he appreciated the Greek philosophers. Aristotle was excessively rationalistic and optimistic about subjecting the raw materials of our ethical thinking to abstract reflection by the construction of organized theories. \
\
By this distinction, my view is much more clearly "anti-utilitarian" than anti-Kantian. The emotions, desires, motivations, passions -- the numerous variegated non-rational or sub-rational mental states of normal human psychology -- can be made rational and/or can be accommodated within a life of reason. That is, any kind of plant can be part of a garden with a clear, purposeful, even beautiful blueprint, even if dead leaves and rotten petals may sometimes dot the floor. \
\
Nussbaum thinks that Foot's "heavily biologized" version of Aristotle is "not closer to but further from the views of practical reason characteristic of the neo-Aristotelians."[@nussbaum1999 192] I'm not so sure Nussbaum is right here, since the biological nature of practical reason is, by any account, a deep mystery more suitable for a dissertation on the philosophy of mind. All I want to commit myself to here is the postulate that human reason (including practical reason) and human biology (physiology and neurophysiology) have a unitary root; and that the root is not *necessarily* the physical but the rational. Blackburn's faint praise of reason as having "independent authority" over "human nature" is the precise view I am working against. If our rationality is not our nature itself, then the neo-Aristotelian project I am conceiving is doomed. \
\
Nussbaum summarizes Baier as an anti-theory theorist who "understands virtue ethics as an alternative to the 'rationalist, law-fixated tradition in moral philosophy", who praises the voice of culture in moral thinking as often or more than she praises critical voice of philosophy over-and-above culture.[@nussbaum1999 194] Though she later tempered this thesis to call for the "harmony" of justice and care. Her critics among the neo-Humeans and neo-Aristotelians are less comfortable deferring to existing community standards. Regardless, the neo-Humeans are concerned to reduce "reason's exorbitant demands and pretensions to authority; it is a way of grounding morality in other features of human nature."[@nussbaum1999 1995] \
\
MacIntyre also is more willing to countenance existing social practices, if they are sound. "For MacIntyre, appeals to reason never in fact resolve ethical disagreements."[@nussbaum1999 1996] This is not right. For MacIntyre, one appeal to reason in one moral tradition will resolve one ethical disagreement, while another appeal to (another!) reason in another moral tradition will resolve another ethical disagreement; and neither will resolve the other. To deny that appeals to reason can resolve disagreements *across* traditions is a far cry from denying that such appeals can resolve disagreements *within* a tradition. Nussbaum ascribes to MacIntyre the monstrous suggestion that "we need to get this functional order through some sort of political authority" who will dole out a "well-assigned role or function" by "authority and tradition" to each person who then "internalizes" that role. In ascribing this view to him, Nussbaum helps herself to a conception of reason MacIntyre has spent more than one book problematizing.  MacIntyre's actual views undercut the very use of the terms "reason" and "tradition" Nussbaum deploys in her critique. In other words, she has not responded to him as well, but responded to a quite different view that might be expressed in the same, multiply ambiguous, terms. \
\
\
Nussbaum's conclusion is that "virtue ethics" is a misleading category and represents multiple pluralities of views across more than one axis. "These views have widely different consequences for the role of the professional philosopher in society, for the criticism of existing habits of greed and anger, for the whole project of placing our hope in reason. What I have called the "common ground" is significant: but it can be pursued within Kantianism, within Utilitarianism, and within neo-Aristotelian and neo-Humean projects of many different sorts."[@nussbaum1999 201]\
\
\
\
\
\
\
### Practical appraisal and action\
\
MacIntyre puts a similar point in different terms. His earliest ethical work distinguished the significance of moral judgments compared to other kinds of judgments. In a careful critique of both intuitionists such as Moore and emotivists such as Stevenson, MacIntyre concluded that both (mistakenly) assume that moral judgments and moral terms have significance only in their referential meaning. The intuitionists, of course, concluded that moral terms refer to a non-natural property, while the emotivists concluded that moral terms do not refer to such a property and so do not refer at all. (Naturalists, later in the 20th century, argue that moral terms refer to natural properties.) MacIntyre\'92s alternative denies the assumption entirely; moral judgments \'93have their own kind of logic\'94 and their significance, like other kinds of judgments, comes from \'93exhibiting the logic of their usage.\'94[@@murphy2003macintyre 118, quoting p. 73 of MacIntyre\'92s master\'92s thesis *The Significance of Moral Judgments*] The significance of moral judgments is that \'93they enable us to solve problems of appraisal and of action.\'94 That is their place in \'93a pattern of language and action\'85\'94 He continues: \
\
>Above all they arise out of the way in which we see the world and the way in which our language allows us to see the world. We cannot sufficiently emphasize the direction given to our appraisals by the language which happens to be available for our descriptions. It is as we see the facts that we judge the world.\
\
MacIntyre\'92s point is that moral judgments are not *simply* useful in moral dilemmas or quandaries. They appear, at the earliest stages of childhood development, in a pattern of usage that is inextricable from the human activities of reasoning, acting, and appraising. Evaluative judgments appear in the widest imaginable spread of human activities, from politics to playgrounds, from sociology to social life, from the practices of law and medicine to the professions of journalism and psychology, from the sciences to the arts. \
\
Even if this point be granted, moral dilemmas are not *unreal*. Moral dilemmas are a special version of our general \'93problems of appraisal and action.\'94 They may be particularly vexing, but they are no different from the general problems of how to live, how to be happy, what kinds of public policies to pursue, what apparently meaningful types of life are really meaningful. \
\
The word \'93ethical\'94 is sometimes taken to have a broader connotation than the narrow \'93moral,\'94 but I think such distinctions etymologically suspect. As MacIntyre summarizes: \'93\'91moral\'92 is the etymological descendant of \'91moralis\'92. But \'91moralis\'92, like its Greek predecessor ethikos \'97 I invented \'91moralis\'92 to translate the Greek word in the De Fato \'97 means \'91pertaining to character\'92 where a man\'92s character is nothing other than his set dispositions to behave systematically in one way rather than another, to lead on particular kind of life.\'94[@macintyre1984after 38] The early uses of Moral did not contrast with \'93\'91prudential\'92 or \'91self interested\'92\'94 nor with \'93\'91legal or \'91religious\'92\'94. MacIntyre concludes: \'93The word to which it is closest in meaning is perhaps most simply \'91practical\'92.\'94\
\
Practicality as a whole domain was sub-divided. The conventional distinction that \'93morality\'94 is a special sub-division pertaining to right and wrong behavior toward others traces to the 1700s, where \'93immorality\'94 meant sexual misbehavior.  The conventional separation of \'93moral\'94 from \'93non-moral\'94 considerations traces to John Stuart Mill who divided the former domain as concerned with duties to benefit and to not harm others. \
\
>Many if not most moral philosophers in modern times see their subject as having to do exclusively with relations between individuals or between an individual and society, and so with such things as obligations, duties, and charitable acts. It is for this reason that, of the four ancient cardinal virtues of justice, courage, temperance, and wisdom, only the first now seems to belong wholly to \'91morality\'92. The other three virtues are recognized as necessary for the practice of \'91morality\'92 but are now thought of as having part of their exercise \'91outside morality\'92 in \'91self\uc0\u8208 regarding\'92 pursuits, \'91moral\'92 and \'91prudential\'92 considerations being contrasted in a way that was alien to Plato or Aristotle.4 J. S. Mill, for instance, expresses this modern point of view quite explicitly, saying in his essay On Liberty that \'91A person who shows rashness, obstinacy, self\u8208 conceit .\'a0.\'a0. who cannot restrain himself from harmful indulgences\'92 shows faults (Mill calls them \'91self\u8208 regarding faults\'92) which \'91are not properly immoralities\'92 and while they \'91may be proofs of any amount of folly .\'a0.\'a0. are only a subject of moral reprobation when they involve a breach of duty to others, for whose sake the individual is bound to have care for himself\'92.[foot2001natural68]\
\
As one MacIntyre scholar puts it: \'91The term practical rationality is derived from Aristotle\'92s *phronesis*. It is to be distinguished from *sophia*, a more technical form of reasoning. Practical rationality leads to more approximate conclusions; it takes context and relative facts into account, and it usually leads to moral or political conclusions.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 60-61] If we take philosophical ethics to be reflection on morality as a whole then, on this view, philosophical ethics is reflection on practical rationality. Practical rationality is simply the process of deciding what to do. It is the process of thinking through what to do. Or, in Gibbard\'92s unforgettable phrasing, it is \'93thinking how to live\'94.[@gibbard2009thinking] \
\
Rosalind Hursthouse likewise says that: \'93The concept of a virtue is the concept of something that makes its possessor good: a virtuous person is a morally good, excellent or admirable person who acts and feels well, rightly, as she should. These are commonly accepted truisms.\'94[@sepvirtue] These truisms encompass our everyday moral judgments about who is admirable much more broadly than our judgments about who is morally upstanding or who avoids being morally despicable. There is more to being an admirable person than *avoiding* transgressions. Nicholas Gier\'92s memorable image of the \'93couch potato\'94 illustrates this point. The Couch Potato works a mindless job  which he is able adequately to perform while watching television (and today we can add, checking his Facebook and Twitter feeds); he rarely rises except to receive himself and microwave his dinners; he is even religious, watching his favorite preachers on Sunday morning television and tithing regularly. Yet the couch potato is by my standards living a wasted life and pitiable life. (I am counting on your similar intuition.) We do not want to imprison him for being such a failure; but we certainly do not admire how he lives. \
\
Nussbaum paraphrases the question \'93how do specifically moral ends and commitments figure among the ends that [a moral agent] pursues?\'94 in this way: \'93This question is posed in a characteristically modern way, presupposing a distinction between the moral and the non-moral that is not drawn, as such, by the Greek thinkers. But if one objects to that characterization, one can rephrase it: for example, What role does concern for other for their own sake play in here scheme of ends? What role does political justice play in her scheme of ends? And so forth.\'94[@nussbaum1999virtue 174] Nussbaum\'92s paraphrase makes clear that our narrowed sense of \'91moral\'92 means simply obligations to others.\
\
By contrast, admirable people command our respect for being morally upstanding, and so much more. We admire them for their brains, their guts, their strength, their rare talents, their outstanding achievements, their unimaginable creativity, their wit and eloquence. Some people are remarkable for *what they are given* (great beauty, great intelligence, and so on). But the admirable person is remarkable not just for good fortune. In fact, admirable people are often admirable for overcoming extraordinarily bad fortune. We truly admire *what they do* with *what they are given*. In a word, we admire how they live. \
\
Julia Annas\'92 presentation of virtue as as a skill illuminates this same point, I think, beautifully. She says, I should develop an account of virtue in which I show have central to the idea that the practical reasoning of the virtuous person is analogous in important ways\'85 to the practical reasoning of someone who's exercising a practical skill.\'94[@annas2011intelligent 3]. What she calls the \'93skill analogy\'94 might be taken as problematic since it drains the peculiarly *moral* quality out of virtue; but we might reverse this worry. The skill analogy colors even living one\'92s daily life with the moral quality of virtue. The virtuous person is *good at* and not just *good* \'97 good at helping others, good at thinking ahead, good at human life. The vicious person, by contrast, is not just bad but *bad at* the essential elements of human life. Of course, being born with a paucity of natural talents is not a matter of immorality. \
\
How did this broad sense of morality as living life excellently narrow? \
\
### How did the meaning of \'91morality\'92 narrow? \
\
First, it meant any particular way of life \'97 something like idiosyncrasy, habit, character. Second, any practical lesson \'97 something like the \'93moral of the story\'94, the point, that to be acted on, the rule, the maxim. Third, a domain of rules of conduct that are \'93neither theological nor legal nor aesthetic\'94[@macintyre1984after 39]\
\
Anscombe notes: \
\
>The terms \'93should\'94 or \'93ought\'94 or \'93needs\'94 relate to good and bad: e.g. machinery needs oil, or should or ought to be oiled, in that running without oil is bad for it, or it runs badly without oil. According to this conception, of course, "should" and "ought" are not used in a special "moral" sense when one says that a man should not bilk. (In Aristotle's sense of the term "moral" [\uc0\u942 \u952 \u953 \u954 \u972 \u962 ], they are being used in connection with a moral subject\u8209 matter: namely that of human passions and [non\u8209 technical] actions.) But they have now acquired a special so\u8209 called "moral" sense-\u8209 i.e. a sense in which they imply some absolute verdict (like one of guilty/not guilty on a man) on what is described in the "ought" sentences used in certain types of context: not merely the contexts that Aristotle would call "moral"\u8209 -passions and actions\u8209 -but also some of the contexts that he would call "intellectual.\'94[@anscombe1958]\
\
The equation between moral and intellectual excellence is not obvious for us. The notion that morality has to do with absolute verdicts is not obvious to Aristotle \'97 nor to contemporary neo-Aristotelian virtue ethicists. \
\
Kant admits the apparent inconsistency in radically dividing speculative or theoretical reason from practical reason: \
>Here first is explained the enigma of the critical philosophy, viz. :how we deny objective reality to the supersensible use of the categories in speculation and yet admit this reality with respect to the objects of pure practical reason. This must at first seem inconsistent as long as this practical use is only nominally known.[@kantpracticalreason]\
\
\
### Three Dimensions of Practical Reason\
\
Now, the domain of duties and obligations pertaining to others is a real domain and a legitimate division. But the division is not between morality and non-morality but between different types of morality or sub-domains. I shall call this domain \'932nd-personal morality\'94, that is, my duties to you or to you all. This domain is vast. But there are other domains for the 1st-person and 3rd-person. \
\
The entire set is the domain of practicality \'97 what one ought to do or ought to think, say, etc. The three sub-domains are defined by the object with regard to which one ought to do and not do this or that. \
\
The domain of 1st-person morality is proper respect and care for one\'92s self \'97 self-love or enlightened self-interest. This is what Mill called the domain of \'93prudence\'94. It includes the virtues that benefit both oneself and others (moderation and courage) but especially practical wisdom, without which none of the other virtues do me much good. \
\
The domain of 3rd-person morality is proper respect and care for everything that is not you or me \'97 animals and plants, pets and work animals, our possessions, our earth and environment, and perhaps even our solar system. The primary virtue of this domain is justice, a respect for the whole and the proper arrangement of all the parts. If God exists, then 3rd-personal morality would require piety to him or her, since on most theisms God is not strictly speaking \'93one of us\'94 but still demands our allegiance, sacrifice, or what have you. \
\
The domain of 2nd-person morality, I said, is vast. It includes interpersonal moral obligations, values, and virtues as well as broader social or political ones. I suggest that the dominant virtue here is not only justice but love \'97 I.e., a strong regard for the other, a charitable orientation to promoting the good of others, refusing to harm them, and committing to protect them from harm. \
\
\
\
Foot argues, I think rightly, that qualities such as benevolence and generosity we tend to call human \'93moral goodness\'94 are of a type with a broader category of goodness.  She says: \'93I want to show that judgments usually considered to be the special subject of moral philosophy should really be seen as belonging to a wider class of evaluations of conduct with which they share a common conceptual structure.\'94 [@foot2001natural 66-67] \
\
The argument is simple: We act on reasons. We pursue what is good, or what seems good. There are various types of good; hence there are various types of reasons. But we do not act *only* on one type of reason: moral reasons. Rather, we weigh and balance all the salient reasons we are aware of at the time when we deliberate and make decisions. In making a business transaction, the entrepreneur may allow considerations of justice to outweigh considerations of profit; or, he may allow considerations about loyalty to a friend outweighs considerations of justice. These two paths are not, respectively, \'93the moral\'94 path and the immoral path. They are both moral and both practical; they both weigh and attempt to negotiate the best reasons to act in this way rather than that, all things considered.\
\
\
So I conclude that the domain of morality is, if anything at all, the sub-domain of practical reason concerned with obligations, duties, rights, goods, and harms that might obtain between one member of society to another. This way of putting the classification clearly connects \'93morality\'94 with politics, family life, education, and so on. However, it paints in bright and burning colors the distinction between morality as a part of practical reason and practice itself. We are, first, and foremost, practical creatures, not merely moral or moralizing ones. \
\
\
We can add to these arguments a Moorean shift: why do we moderns *assume* that there is a special domain of the moral? The ancient and medieval philosophers in the west thought of the domain of practical reason as a natural unit: all that is voluntary or under our control may be done well or badly. Our goal in living well is to to identify what to think, what to do, and what to make. As a corollary, we must identify what not to think, what not to do, and what not to make. But shrinking the whole domain of practical reason down to the domain of a few absolute prohibitions on harming others is a modern innovation. If it is right, then it is a modern invention. If it is wrong, it is a modern ignorance. Either way, its proponent needs, I think, to offer some account of why such a shrinking amounts to progress rather than regress in moral theorizing. \
\
\
## 2. Is practical reason instrumental? \
\
Although it seems reason is instrumental, rational motives are inherently related to *ends* seen as good; the first principle of practical reason is "pursue the good".\
\
\
## 3. Is moral reasoning a special type of practical reasoning? \
\
Although it seems that moral reasoning is the process of judging actions as right or wrong, or resolving moral dilemmas, or identifying a special property "goodness", moral reasoning is the business of pursuing what is worthwhile,  appraising action decide what to do. \
\
\
\
## 5. Is morality about oneself or only others?\
\
Although it seems "morality" is narrowly about how we treat others, it is about self- and other-regarding virtues.\
\
\
\
## 6. Is there only one virtue? \
\
Although it seems that there are no other virtues because all virtue is knowledge, there are other virtues related to other cognitive and affective features of human nature, each of which, nevertheless, depends on and enhances practical reason. \
\
*The virtue of practical reason is, not surprisingly, practical *wisdom*. Yet practical wisdom is strange and likely to be misunderstand: it is both theoretical (aiming at knowing what's true) and practical (aiming at what to do). To co-opt a phrase from Alan Gibbard:^[I\'92m not sure Gibbard would appreciate my use of the phrase.] our activity of practical reasoning is "thinking how to live.\'94[@gibbard2009thinking. I take the activity of thinking what to do in a far more realist direction than Gibbard. However, I have noticed with pleasure that Gibbard himself has become more open to realism in the recent years. He asks us to suppose that \'93normative realists are right about how normative concepts act\'94 (xii), and only wishes to establish the possibility of the truth of his hypothesis that \'93the meaning of this phrase \'91the thing to do\'92 is explained expressionistically: if I assert \'93Fleeing is the thing to do\'94, I thereby express a state of mind, deciding to flee.\'94 (8) He says he is a \'93naturalist about humanity, about human thinking and planning, but in a sense I end up a non-naturalist about *oughts*. Much of what non-naturalists say is right, I conclude\'97but this needn\'92t be mysterious to any naturalist.\'94 (xii)] So practical wisdom is knowing how to live, and *really knowing* it. Stated this way, it is easy to see why some have argued that practical wisdom is the *only* virtue. If one knows exactly how to live, in each circumstance, in each challenge, according to proper reasons, and for proper motives, what more to virtue could there be? Maggie Little[@little2007virtue] argues that virtue is a species of knowledge; John McDowell[@mcdowell1979virtue] argues something similar.* So why bother dividing up various virtues? \
\
I do not think Aristotle himself was perfectly clear on this point. Though he divides up intellectual virtues into prudence, science, intellect, judgment, understanding, deliberation, and so on (Greek: phronesis, sophia, nous, gnome, sunesis, eubolia respectively), and though he says that prudence (knowledge about changing particulars) is inferior to wisdom (science about unchanging universals), nevertheless he says the absence of prudence ruins all other aspiring virtues.[@aristotle NE, VI] \
\
\
## 7. Is practical reason objective like logic?\
\
Although it seems that practical reason is universal and objective like logic; it is intersubjective like logic; nevertheless, it is objective; it can be universal across cultures and traditions.\
\
\
*Practical reason is supposed by some to resolve possible worries about cultural relativism with regard to virtue.*\
\
1. It seems that practical reason is not objective since people disagree. \
2. It seems to not be objective because it arises only in community. \
2. On the other hand, Shafer-Landau argues that ethics is a species of philosophy. \
4. I argue that practical reason is as objective as theoretical reason (whether both are objective or not). \
\
\
1. It seems that practical reason is not objective since people disagree. \
\
The question of how to live, and of how to resolve pressing moral disputes and dramatic moral conundrums, is not easy. There are various answers. People disagree.\
\
Anyone who has long engaged in dialectical disputes over the various answer to the normative question of how to live well eventually comes to ask a secondary question: is there even any truth to be found? Are there any \'91right answers\'92 in ethics? Is there anything to all this discussion besides gas? Some worry that ethics has no \'91right answers\'92 because it is all just intuition-pumping. Some people view ethics as too easy because it is only a discussion of one\'92s opinion. \
\
We must admit that normative ethical conclusions \'97 whatever conclusions satisfy us at the end of a long philosophical discussion about what is good and right \'97 are different from conclusions in paleontology, medicine, or calculus. What does the difference amount to? Why is ethics *as a discipline* so different from, say, natural sciences? \
\
There are two sorts of interpretations of ethics as a discipline in light of the diversity of answers to the question about how to live well. The first is Hume\'92s answer, that ethics is \'93easy\'94 (while metaphysics, philosophy of mind, and philosophical anthropology are presumably difficult). \
\
The second is Aristotle\'92s, that ethics is *a different sort of science* because it has a *different subject matter* to which it must correspond. He says, \'93For a well schooled man is wanting searches for that degree of precision in each kind of study which the nature of the subject at hand admits: is obviously just as foolish to accept arguments of probability from a mathematician has to demand strict demonstrations from an orator.\'94 [@aristotle Book I.3]\
\
By the traditional classification, ethics is a form of philosophy. Russ Shafer-Landau persuasively argues this simple equation in defense of moral realism[@shafer2007ethics] but the point has broader import. If ethics is *not* a species of philosophy, it is something else entirely. Perhaps it is a species of politics. Such a categorization assumes, at the outset, that power prevails over truth. But to concede that there are no right answers in ethics, that ethical philosophers have no hope of finding any ethical truth is to give up on ethics as a discipline. \
\
So suppose ethics is a species of philosophy. The indirect answer is another question: Are there \'91right answers\'92 in philosophy? Isn\'92t the relation of philosophy in general to ethics in particular the relation of genus to species? This is the relation Russ Shafer-Landau argues for.[@shafer2012ethics] So the fate of ethical claims or ethical theories hangs on the fate of philosophical claims and theories as a whole. If we are philosophical optimists at all \'97 if we are not total skeptics or nihilists \'97 then we can be ethical optimists. \
\
So what species of philosophy is ethics? If philosophy is its genus, what is its differentia? As I have been arguing, ethics is the discipline of practical reason. There are \'91right answers\'92 in ethics since there are right ways to live one\'92s life, there are wells to live well and ways to live poorly; things can go well or badly for us. One of the fundamental governing assumptions of this work is that there is no special domain of the moral. Value theory is a whole package. There is at bottom no intelligible distinction between morality and prudence. \
\
\
2. It seems to not be objective because it arises only in community. \
\
Tradition-constituted rationality was supposed to explain why practices can vary between people and traditions that both claim to be rational and believe the rival to be irrational; the process of switching between traditions explains, from within a tradition, one can rationally adjudicate these disagreements. This is why *practical rationality* is so important for MacIntyre's theory of *virtue.* \
\
[^14]:  *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* and *Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry* treat rationality as the ground of ethical reasoning, while *After Virtue* and *Dependent Rational Animals* treat ethical reasoning as practical reasoning. \
\
Nevertheless, worries about relativism may linger. For MacIntyre, virtues are relative to practices; practices are relative to traditions; traditions are relative to conceptions of rationality. His answer to this worry is, I believe, the crux of his whole theory of ethics. It appeals to two concepts that are, for him, intimately bound up with each other. The two concepts are practical reason and human nature. *Dependent Rational Animals* is the capstone to address lingering worries about relativism. \
\
The project of *Dependent Rational Animals* is to insist that human beings are animals even if we are animals of a particular and unusual sort; and that our dependence and vulnerability are as morally significant as our independence, autonomy, or self-sufficiency. In other words, there are virtues of both autonomy *and* dependence. The book also contends that certain social arrangements are conducive to the transmission and sustenance of both kinds of virtue.  \
\
Let\'92s consider a key quotation on each of these themes. Regarding the notion that we are unusual animals, MacIntyre argues at length that the human differentia (be it language, reason, practical reason, self-consciousness, or what have you) does not eradicate the commonalities between us and other animals. He says: \
\
>I shall contend that although our differences from all other species are certainly of crucial importance, it is also important that both initially in our earliest childhood activities and to some extent thereafter we comport ourselves towards the world in much the same way as other intelligent animals. Indeed our ability to transcend those limitations depends in part upon certain of those animal characteristics among them the nature of our identity.[@macintyre1999dependent 8] \
\
The point, I take it, is that rational animals is *what we are*. If we cannot escape our identity as animals who are (potentially) practically rational, then we cannot escape our need for certain virtues. Furthermore, some activities will militate against our growing up to become fully practical rationality; these are vices. What kind of animal are we? We are by nature practical reasoners. Imagine any scenario of humans gathering and doing what comes naturally, and it will involve group deliberation about what to do: High school students debating about where to sit at lunch; couples arguing over the budget; political leaders proposing new laws; philosophy department meetings making hiring and admissions decisions. It is impossible (for fully functioning adults) to live life even for a full day without engaging in such reasoning. The pattern is the same. Groups of humans engage in practical reasoning \'97 a community thinking what to do. \
\
A second point is that human life is not one continuous phase of adulthood; it begins with youth and ends with old age. So MacIntyre breaks important new ground in explaining the relation between virtues of independence and "virtues of acknowledged dependence." He argues that the vulnerability, fragility, and affliction characteristic especially of early childhood and old age are highly morally significant. As he says:  \
\
>Virtues of independent rational agency need for their adequate exercise to be accompanied by what I shall call the virtues of acknowledge dependence and that a failure to understand this is apt to secure some features of rational agency. Moreover both sets of virtues are needed in order to actualize the distinctive potentialities that are specific to the human rational animal. Identifying how and why they are needed is a prerequisite for understanding their central place in the kind of human life through which human flourishing can be achieved.[@macintyre1999dependent 8] \
\
There is an obvious -- and I think exciting -- connection here with the ethics of care. Many others in the Aristotelian tradition have noticed the significance that we have the potential to be rational, and the potential to be independent reasoners. Fewer, until recently, have noticed the significance of dependence.[Cf @held2005ethics. There is an obvious overlap with some feminist ethics, and MacIntyre acknowledges his debt.] But the virtues of acknowledge dependence are not identical to the virtues (such as the empathy or patience) *of a care-giver*. Rather, they are virtues that arise in *relation* between the dependent and the care-giver. Dependence is, after all, as close to any of use as sickness, injury, or misfortune. The dependent needs certain virtues (gratitude is perhaps a good example) that the care-giver does not need, or needs differently. Independent rationality is rather the exception than the rule. So it is simply wrong-headed to magnify the virtues of independence out of proportion of those that are needed, in individuals and in a community, at the beginning and end of life, and also any disabling portion of life. \
\
To achieve the communal goal of producing independent reasoners requires a systemic web of virtues across the entire communal association. MacIntyre argues that \'93neither the modern state nor the modern family can supply that kind of political and social association that is needed.\'94[@macintyre1999dependent 9] Not only individual human beings, but entire communities, institutions, and nations need virtues to keep their integrity and to produce the next generation of independent, virtuous, rational animals. While *Dependent Rational Animals* is an exciting and fruitful book that deserves more attention, I must transition to explaining how it further helps protect against the charge of relativism. \
\
### Practical wisdom ###\
\
Our human nature as dependent practical reasoners demonstrates why prudence or *phronesis* is the master virtue. For *Phronesis* complements every other moral virtue. MacIntyre defends Aristotle\'92s conception of the practical syllogism. For example, *I ought to do (the courageous thing of) resisting a student\'92s attempt to bribe me for a higher grade. This student is attempting to bribe me for a higher grade. Therefore, in this case, I ought to do (the courageous thing of) resisting this student\'92s attempt to bribe me.* The major premise here is an evaluative judgment about a virtue or action-type; the minor premise is a factual judgment about a situation or action-token; the conclusion is a *maxim*. It is a judgment but not merely a judgment; it is  *an action*. Each piece of the practical syllogism is needed for the whole to function in practice. For without moral virtues, prudence may be knowledge of what one ought to do but it does not entail that one is in the habit of actually doing it. And, more crucially, without prudence, the moral virtues are simply skills -- skills that might be serviceable to bad ends. Without prudence, one might be skilled in achieving *what is not to be done*.\
\
The mastery of prudence over other virtues also unifies the other virtues. *Dependent Rational Animals* supplies a necessary unifying base for MacIntyre\'92s virtue theory in three ways: it unifies intellectual and moral virtues, unifies various moral virtues, and unifies the various stages of the narrative of *human* life. \
\
### Hursthouse on *Phronesis*\
\
> Aristotle makes a number of specific remarks about phronesis that are the subject of much scholarly debate, but the (related) modern concept is best understood by thinking of what the virtuous morally mature adult has that nice children, including nice adolescents, lack. Both the virtuous adult and the nice child have good intentions, but the child is much more prone to mess things up because he is ignorant of what he needs to know in order to do what he intends. A virtuous adult is not, of course, infallible and may also, on occasion, fail to do what she intended to do through lack of knowledge, but only on those occasions on which the lack of knowledge is not culpable ignorance. So, for example, children and adolescents often harm those they intend to benefit either because they do not know how to set about securing the benefit or, more importantly, because their understanding of what is beneficial and harmful is limited and often mistaken. Such ignorance in small children is rarely, if ever culpable, and frequently not in adolescents, but it usually is in adults. Adults are culpable if they mess things up by being thoughtless, insensitive, reckless, impulsive, shortsighted, and by assuming that what suits them will suit everyone instead of taking a more objective viewpoint. They are also, importantly, culpable if their understanding of what is beneficial and harmful is mistaken. It is part of practical wisdom to know how to secure real benefits effectively; those who have practical wisdom will not make the mistake of concealing the hurtful truth from the person who really needs to know it in the belief that they are benefiting him.\
>Quite generally, given that good intentions are intentions to act well or \'93do the right thing\'94, we may say that practical wisdom is the knowledge or understanding that enables its possessor, unlike the nice adolescents, to do just that, in any given situation. The detailed specification of what is involved in such knowledge or understanding has not yet appeared in the literature, but some aspects of it are becoming well known. Even many deontologists now stress the point that their action-guiding rules cannot, reliably, be applied correctly without practical wisdom, because correct application requires situational appreciation\'97the capacity to recognize, in any particular situation, those features of it that are morally salient. This brings out two aspects of practical wisdom.\
>One is that it characteristically comes only with experience of life. Amongst the morally relevant features of a situation may be the likely consequences, for the people involved, of a certain action, and this is something that adolescents are notoriously clueless about precisely because they are inexperienced. It is part of practical wisdom to be wise about human beings and human life. (It should go without saying that the virtuous are mindful of the consequences of possible actions. How could they fail to be reckless, thoughtless and short-sighted if they were not?)\
>The aspect that is more usually stressed regarding situational appreciation is the practically wise agent's capacity to recognize some features of a situation as more important than others, or indeed, in that situation, as the only relevant ones. The wise do not see things in the same way as the nice adolescents who, with their imperfect virtues, still tend to see the personally disadvantageous nature of a certain action as competing in importance with its honesty or benevolence or justice.\
>These aspects coalesce in the description of the practically wise as those who understand what is truly worthwhile, truly important, and thereby truly advantageous in life, who know, in short, how to live well. In the Aristotelian \'93eudaimonist\'94 tradition, this is expressed in the claim that they have a true grasp of eudaimonia.\
\
\
### Tradition-constituted rationality objections ###\
\
One family of objections pertain to the way MacIntyre's ethical theory appeals to tradition-constituted rationality. MacIntyre argues that we should return to the Aristotelian tradition of virtue and practical reason. We must beware one misunderstanding. Any talk of \'93returning\'94 is liable to sound nostalgic. At the risk of sounding paradoxical, we might put it this way: MacIntyre's positive ethical positions are *traditional* but not *nostalgic.* In fact, his definition of tradition is *progressive*.  Tradition is an ongoing, socially-embedded argument over time, which necessarily entails that moral enquiry is dynamic -- even *modern*. To be traditional is not to be past-oriented; to be traditional is to be staunchly future-oriented, since the business of life is not only the pursuit of our telos but the transmission of everything valuable and precious to the next generation. \
\
One critic who misunderstands MacIntyre along these lines is Martha Nussbaum.[@nussbaum1989recoiling] She begins her review of *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* with an age-old dilemma between the social stability afforded by tradition (with its danger of hidebound error) and the social volatility endemic to critical reflection (with its opportunity of progress toward truth). She alludes to this dilemma as articulated by Aristotle: \
\
>In the second book of the Politics, Aristotle asks whether it is a good thing to encourage changes in society. Should people be offered rewards for inventing some change in the traditional laws? No, he writes, because this would lead to instability and unnecessary tampering with what is working well. Should we, on the other hand, listen to those who wish to keep ancestral traditions fixed and immune from criticism? No again\'97for if we reason well we can make progress in lawmaking, just as we do in other arts and sciences.[@nussbaum1989recoiling]\
\
Aristotle\'92s solution is that it should be hard but not impossible to change societal structures. Of course, we don\'92t have to pick just one or the other. But, putting it starkly, of the two it is better to gamble for progress toward truth at the risk of instability than to gamble for stability at the risk hidebound error. Strangely, Nussbaum takes MacIntyre to be reversing Aristotle\'92s balance. She thinks MacIntyre is urging for betting on social stability even if it means sticking closer to existing tradition (and hence surpassing or intentionally avoiding critical reflection) than is compatible with unfettered progress.  \
\
This is not an objection to MacIntyre \'97 it is a misreading. He rejects fideism and this kind of conservative traditionalism. MacIntyre sides with Aristotle, in my view, that the risk of complacent error is greater than the risk of instability. For hidebound error is likely to perpetuate itself across generations, while the instability arising from a cacophony of disagreement is likely to be short-lived. Nussbaum does not see that MacIntyre's proposed solution is not a sort of *anti-progressive* longing for the past. It is radically progressive.  His solution is not to reverse progress but to replace the Enlightenment's standard of progress with a more tenable alternative. Ironically, it appears to me that Nussbaum is too conservative in her defense of the Enlightenment's standard of progress; MacIntyre is the progressive here. Rather than accusing MacIntyre of being too conservative, Nussbaum should focus on his critique of the Enlightenment. MacIntyre's critique may be wrong, but it is with that critique that she should take issue. She should not accuse him of failing to "make progress... [in] arts and sciences" but of "tampering with what is working well."\
\
\
MacIntyre's theory of rationality may be wrong, but it is not wrong along the lines that Nussbaum attacks. The other objections we must consider are that his concept of tradition-constituted rationality is incompatible with the very act of writing a book like *After Virtue*, or unhelpfully vague.\
\
First, is MacIntyre\'92s concept of tradition-constituted rationality even coherent? Suppose some traditions are truly incommensurable to each other, and that MacIntyre himself is truly situated within a tradition. It follows it is not possible to write a book (like *After Virtue*?) from a universal, objective, view-from-nowhere. But MacIntyre wrote such books and defending such theories. This amounts to a performative contradiction. \
\
Even if his concept is coherent,  is it *clear* enough to be an indispensable feature of an ethical theory? What constitutes a tradition? MacIntyre's examples sometimes lead us to believe that a tradition can be anything from a religion (Judaism) to a discipline (moral inquiry) to a philosophical school (Thomism). \
\
Once the concept of tradition is clarified, how can MacIntyre avoid the charge of relativism at this level? According to MacIntyre's account, members of traditions can leave their primary tradition after undergoing an epistemological crisis. Remember that varying traditions can disagree about a proposition P. Perhaps tradition A finds P true and B finds it false, on best evidence and sufficient reflection. But incommensurable traditions disagree about the standards (say, S1 and S2) by which to judge the truth and even the rationality of other traditions. So A finds P true and rational (by S1) while B finds P false and irrational (by S2). They genuinely disagree. And A judges B to be irrational (since they deny that P) while B returns the favor (since A affirms that P). \
\
Let's put these abstractions into an example. Consider Annabelle. Annabelle is a member of tradition A. Suppose that by A's standards of rationality, S1 contradictory propositions cannot both be true in the same sense. And suppose that A teaches that P. Finally, suppose that P entails both (Q and ~Q). Annabelle discovers a problem with her tradition. She cannot deny P nor can she affirm the contradiction. After some searching about, she concludes she cannot solve the problem and cannot even discover the rational resources with which to solve them. Being passingly familiar with tradition B, she becomes curious why her friends who belong to that tradition deny P and exercises her philosophical imagination to begin to see B "from within." Tradition B is compelling, since it denies that P. She "converts" traditions. However, there is a problem with tradition B, and that is that the standard of rationality of B (S2) allows its adherents to affirm a contradiction. So now, even though Annabelle left A to avoid having to affirm a contradiction (by her standard of rationality S1) now that she has joined B she no longer sees it as irrational to affirm the contradiction (by her new standard of rationality S2). This is surely an odd conclusion. \
\
A second variation on the same problem is this: how would a born-and-raised member of tradition B, affirming S2, ever come to epistemological crisis? Discontentment with contradictions is not available to B members *ex hypothesi*. They do not see affirming a contradiction as irrational. Their tradition can bear a hundred instances of (Q and ~Q).\
\
The odd conclusion of this thought experiment is a dilemma: either such nonsense is possible, or embracing the law of non-contradiction is a universal standard of rationality in every tradition. The latter option seems to indicate that traditions A and B are *not* actually incommensurable, since they share one rather substantial presupposition. The flow of members from one to the other is intelligible. The former option allows A and B to be incommensurable, but seems to freeze members in their own tradition. Members of A would have no (rational) justification for joining B, while members of B would have no (rational) justification for leaving B. So either all traditions are the same (in which case MacIntyre's definition is unclear) or some people are in principle locked in their own tradition (in which case one kind of relativism is final). \
\
While "tradition" and "tradition-constituted rationality" were supposed to solve the conundrums MacIntyre faced in his life and philosophical career, the cure may have been worse than the disease. \
\
### Discussion\
\
MacIntyre's denial of relativism boils down to two claims: the first is that even enquirers situated within a tradition can achieve *truth*, because truth is distinct from *rationality*; the second claim, which is related, is that enquirers can overcome the rational limitations of their tradition. \
\
\
#### Relative enquiry, absolute truth ###\
\
MacIntyre accepts -- indeed, argues for -- a certain truth within relativism. That truth is that every enquirer seeks the conclusion of the enquiry at a particular time and place, within a particular social setting, within a language, and within a tradition. Following Lutz, we can say that MacIntyre accepts \'93relativity\'94. Relativity (a term borrowed from Michael Krausz[@krausz1984relativism]) is a thesis about *the condition of enquiry.* It is not a thesis about the *conclusion of enquiry.* Lutz approves of Mark Colby's statement that "argumentative situatedness is inescapable."[@lutz2004tradition 89] However such relative situatedness is compatible with objective or absolute or mind-independent or tradition-independent *truth*. \
\
Returning to Rorty's claim, we can say that MacIntyre agrees that "nothing can be said about... rationality" except what is taken as rational in a given society and tradition; where he disagrees is in equating rationality with *truth.* From the historically- and socially-situated position of enquiry, a philosopher (he argues) may indeed find truth. It is impossible to achieve objective or absolute or tradition-independent *rationality* but it is possible -- indeed, it is the hope and telos of enquiry -- to achieve objective *truth.* This may seem a paradox. \
\
The primary kind of truth we seek in enquiry is "the adequation of the mind to reality."[@aquinas Q.16 and *De Veritate* Q.1, A.1-3. "Veritas est adaequatio rei et intellectus."] This is the understanding of truth inherent in the Aristotelian tradition.[^7]  Aristotle says, \'93To say of what is that it is not, or of what is not that it is, is false, while to say of what is that it is, and of what is not that it is not, is true."[@aristotle *Metaphysics* 1011b25]  Aquinas calls this the adequation of the intellect to the object.\
\
[^7]: On the correspondence theory of truth, Marian David says: "The main positive argument given by advocates of the correspondence theory of truth is its obviousness. Descartes: 'I have never had any doubts about truth, because it seems a notion so transcendentally clear that nobody can be ignorant of it...the word "truth", in the strict sense, denotes the conformity of thought with its object' (1639, AT II 597). Even philosophers whose overall views may well lead one to expect otherwise tend to agree. Kant: 'The nominal definition of truth, that it is the agreement of [a cognition] with its object, is assumed as granted' (1787, B82). William James: 'Truth, as any dictionary will tell you, is a property of certain of our ideas. It means their "agreement", as falsity means their disagreement, with "reality"'' (1907, p. 96). Indeed, The Oxford English Dictionary tells us: "Truth, n. Conformity with fact; agreement with reality'".\
\
However, 'truth' is ambiguous across at least two senses: a metaphysical, substantive sense and an epistemological, logical sense. The metaphysical sense of truth is simply reality. "Truth" is being itself. The logical sense of truth (which MacIntyre alludes to here) is the adequation of the intellect to those beings. Logical "truth" is knowing the (metaphysical) truth.[^18] \
\
[^18]: The third semantic sense of 'truth' would, naturally, be the accurate relation between the content of one's assertions and the beings about which one is making assertions. Semantic "truth" would be veridical statements about the metaphysical truth.\
\
If we understand MacIntyre to be arguing or assuming that (logical) truth is adequation of mind to reality, we can make sense of his endorsement of "relativity". Rationality is something more pragmatic than truth, something more like "warranted assertability."[@dewey1941propositions 169] That is, the theories we rationally construct are, for us, the "best theory so far".[@macintyre1988whose] It is no contradiction or paradox to assert that our rationality is the best thus far but that others in the future (or the past, or in rival traditions) might be *closer* to the truth. \
\
The second point is that enquirers from within various traditions can (and often do) come to realize that their tradition is incoherent by its own standards and from this epistemological crisis come to find the resources of a rival tradition superior to their own; Aristotelian (and specifically Thomist) moral enquiry is, he argues, more rationally justified than encyclopedic or genealogical enquiry *by their standards* and *by its own standards*.  \
\
In this way, MacIntyre escapes (one iteration) of the charge of relativism. The truth can be known from within the confines of our tradition and perspective. This answer, of course, puts pressure on his definition of "tradition." We shall return to this concern below. \
\
Another worry about relativism was this: Are there evil practices? If so, it seemed that MacIntyre's theory would allow "virtues" to serve wicked ends. The rebuttal to this charge depends on the unity of virtue. \
\
In *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?*, MacIntyre explicitly retracts his earlier belief that virtues exist without a unity under prudence.[@macintyre1988whose preface, p. x] The consequences of this retraction, Lutz argues, are crucial to refuting the charge of relativism. If virtues are unified, then even though virtues exist only in the context of practices, "no genuine practice can be inherently evil."[@lutz2004tradition 102] Rather, practical reason can judge *apparent goods* as genuine goods. The qualities needed for achieving the spurious goods internal to that "practice" would not be virtues but only *apparent virtues*. \
\
Now, such a definition certainly seems ad hoc. But Lutz provides a persuasive illustration: eugenics. Eugenics certainly seems to bear the markings of a genuine practice. Its apparent good is the purification of the gene pool for future generations. However, genuine virtues militate *against* the achievement of that goal. For example, Lutz cites a story of a doctor who had the virtue of compassion found himself unable to pursue the program of euthanizing mentally-disabled children.[@poliakov1979harvest 186-7] We might also recall Huck Finn's internal struggle with his "conscience" in Twain's *Adventures of Huckleberry Finn*. Huck decides to turn Jim in to the slave owners. He writes a letter outing Jim, and says: "I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I had ever felt so in my life, and I knowed I could pray now." Yet for all that, after vividly confronting Jim's humanity and goodness, he feels the loyalty of their friendship and wavers:\
\
>It was a difficult situation. I picked up the letter, and held it in my hand. I was trembling, because I knew had to make a choice between two things, and the outcome of my decision would last forever. I thought about it a minute while I held my breath. And then I said to myself: \'93All right, then, I\'92ll GO to hell"\'97and tore it up.[@twain2014adventures,Chapter 31] \
\
The humor of this passage arises, in large part, because of the tension between the *apparent good* of treating Jim as legal property and the *actual good* of treating Jim as an end in himself, as a free man just like any other. Huck's virtue (in this case, loyalty or friendship) *cannot* be put to use in the service of a corrupting practice like slave-trading. Just as vice subverts institutions and their worthy practices, virtue "subverts" vicious institutions and unworthy practices. Virtue marks the difference between the coward who disobeys his commanding officer's orders because the obedience would put him at risk of painful death and the courageous person who disobeys his commanding officer's order because obedience would require wrongdoing. Without prudence to discriminate between the two cases, we lack any resources by which to discriminate courage and cowardice, between a virtuous resistance and vicious resistance. \
\
Some might worry that the distinction between apparent goods and actual goods brings with it more problems than it solves. It is certainly a distinction that leaves many questions unanswered. My first reply is that such a distinction is inevitable and necessary in our practical reasoning. Assume for a reductio that "there is no real distinction between apparent and real goods." Then either *nothing* is "actually good" (everything that appears good is just an apparent good) or that *nothing* is "actually bad though it appears good" (everything that appears good is a real good). But I take it as axiomatic and irrefutable that some things are actually good (life, pleasure, happiness, friendship). And some things that appear good are not good: obeying unjust laws, enjoying the misfortune of an enemy, etc.  Therefore there is a real distinction between apparent and real goods. \
\
A second reply, however, requires conceding that MacIntyre's theory leaves us unsatisfied. That is, it might be that the unsatisfying aspects of his theory track those aspects of morality that are unsatisfying. The admitted indeterminacy of MacIntyre's account reflects the real indeterminacy of our moral lives. Consider two phenomena: some individuals and cultures persist in behaviors (that I believe) are wicked and unjustifiable -- slavery, child prostitution, ritual human sacrifice, or what have you. It needs to be explained, from within my tradition, how it could be that otherwise decent and normal human beings could persist in such vileness. The other phenomena is this: some individuals and cultures repent and change (what I believe are) their wicked ways. Some make moral progress. The paradox is that while we cannot expect magical linear moral progression from wicked to good everywhere, neither can we despair of any person or culture making moral progress. It just seems a brute datum of observation that some are stubbornly stuck in their wicked ways, and some are admirably firm in their benevolent resolve. How do we explain this paradoxical phenomenon? \
\
MacIntyre's account offers an explanation of why vices sometimes persist within pseudo-practices, institutions, and traditions from generation to generation; on the other hand, it explains why practice-enabling virtues sometimes emerge to disrupt a pseudo-practice, a wicked institution, and a corrupt or at least incomplete tradition. The fact is that "many kinds of activities can be, and in fact are considered to be, practices. Some of these may conflict radically, owing to errors and insufficiencies in rationality."[@lutz2004tradition 103] Errors in rationality explain errors in traditions and hence false ascriptions of the title 'virtue.' Rationality answers to truth, to the world as it is, not merely to the pragmatic  truth to "dialectical success."[@lutz2004tradition 104] Hence, virtues answer to *what is really good*. They do not merely answer to "what-counts-as-good-for-us", which property is relative to each tradition. \
\
In this way, MacIntyre escapes this iteration of the charge of relativism, while still explaining why rival traditions differ -- and sometimes radically differ -- in their evaluations and opinions. Incomplete traditions can, and do, undergo crisis. Particular persons within that tradition discover and asseverate on inadequacies within the tradition, leading to an epistemological crisis. In response, others within the same tradition may become willing to examine the resources of rival traditions and either quit their primary tradition or re-fashion it, re-make it, update it, and make real moral and intellectual progress. \
\
\
### The consistency of tradition-constituted rationality ###\
\
MacIntyre would have us believe that 'rationality' is not a disembodied set of timeless and universal procedures of thinking. My rationality includes whatever standards of reasoning I accept, and all the other resources (facts, authorities, memories) I use to judge true and false. I already responded to worries presented above about whether rationalities are ultimately incommensurable. The fact that people can, and do, identify inconsistencies with their own tradition, identify the resources of rival traditions, and switch traditions. \
\
Even after clarifying MacIntyre's optimism about the possibility of ethical truth, his answer to relativism is sufficient but still somehow indeterminate. This indeterminacy is partly due, as I have suggested, to his appeal to practical rationality. While this appeal seems to me to solve some problems, there is one lingering problem it does not solve.  From my perspective (or my tradition), *every legitimate tradition* affirms the law of non-contradiction. But that is just to say that if Walt Whitman or Nagarjuna denies the law  of non contradiction, then I will necessarily judge them to be irrational.[@sepcontradiction. "Do I contradict myself? / Very well, then, I contradict myself. / (I am large, I contain multitudes.)  (Walt Whitman, \'93Song of Myself\'94); "Everything is real and not real. / Both real and not real. / Neither real nor not real. / That is Lord Buddha's teaching." (M\uc0\u363 la-madhyamaka-k\u257 rik\u257  18:8), quoted in Garfield (1995: 102)]  But I wish to go further and say that this strand of Buddhism *really is irrational*. That is, I wish to affirm that they are irrational -- full stop. I am not sure MacIntyre's theory allows me to affirm that. Unless I am missing something crucial here, this seems to me a limitation of the theory. \
\
Perhaps a qualified acceptance of MacIntyre's claim about tradition-constituted rationality is that when a tradition does not *seem* share this standard of rationality (the value of logical consistency) I should not be too quick to judge that I have really understood their meaning. Perhaps when I ask them if they affirm (S is P and S is not P) they have a slightly different concept in mind for "not" or for "and." Or perhaps they are speaking of an entity instantiating a property and not instantiating that same property at the same time but in ever so slightly different respects. Walt Whitman may be saying he contradicts himself in ever so slightly different respects in order to grasp apparently paradoxical truths that can be predicated of a transcendental modern man. Or perhaps they are denying both P and not P in favor of some other, different articulation of the predicates a given subject instantiates. In the case of any of these alternatives, the principle of charity recommends I extend my interlocutor the benefit of the doubt before concluding that the appearance of irrationality reflects real irrationality. \
\
### The clarity of tradition-constituted rationality\
\
What exactly is a tradition? MacIntyre's account is not clear. John Haldane (among others) questions MacIntyre\'92s ability coherently to identify what a tradition is. What is tradition A? How do we differentiate it from B? Are two traditions separate and hence identifiable only if they are *incommensurable*? How much difference constitutes separation? How much overlap is compatible with difference? Jewish and Christian traditions share a common origin and bear considerable overlap in authorities, scriptures, and doctrines. \
\
MacIntyre\'92s definition makes answering these questions difficult. He characterizes a tradition as "separate and unified when its members or texts have a core set of shared commitments to beliefs, when the tradition is situated in a particular context in a particular set of institutions and when the tradition has an identifiable linguistic difference when compared to other traditions.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 83] But is there any universal procedure for identifying such linguistic and institutional differences? \
\
The right response to this call for clarification, I think, comes from Weinstein. We should not expect, by MacIntyre\'92s lights, that there is an automatically objective, view-from-nowhere by which we can define tradition itself. Rather, MacIntyre concludes that \'93the concept of a tradition, together with the criteria for its use and application, is itself one developed from within one particular tradition-based standpoint. This does not preclude its application to the very tradition within which it was developed.\'94[@horton1994after 295]  MacIntyre grants that his self-definition of his own tradition arises, in part, from his criteria of that tradition. Traditions change over time. They progress (according to their own unchanging standards) toward unchanging goals or else they abandon old standards. This is liable to frustrate some readers. But the alternative is worse. The alternative is a denial of pluralism that liberalism holds dear. For it is intellectual imperialism to assume that I have the *real* scoop on every other tradition. It assumes I have the right to define and critique all other traditions *in my own terms.* Even though MacIntyre thinks his own tradition correct, and others incorrect, this is not imperialistic. For he is willing to reflect on his own tradition, examine its resources and inadequacies, and engage through philosophical imagination with rivals. \
\
In short, by MacIntyre's lights he does not need a definition of tradition that is any more cut and dry than it is. Forcefully to disagree with this conclusion requires his interlocutor to produce an alternative theory of practical rationality. But that alternative will either aim to be *not* tradition-constituted but universal (which is the encyclopedic tradition) or it will admit is tradition-constituted but the "best so far" (which is MacIntyre's own view). \
\
We can think of this worry about MacIntyre's theory more generally as a problem of thinking about thinking. MacIntyre is a theorist of virtue and practical rationality. Hence rationally to assess his theory requires thinking through our own theory of rationality. The errors we make in *thinking things through* are not likely to be solved by *thinking them through*. The Greek proverb is: \'93If water chokes us, what shall we drink?\'94 The Latin proverb (from a very different context) is \'93Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?\'94 \'97 who will guard the guards themselves? I believe the answer to the rhetorical question is *no one at all* can guard the guards; if water chokes us, there is *nothing at all we can drink to wash it down*. Likewise, if something is deeply wrong with the way we think, how can theorizing about rationality right the wrong? \
\
Some of the errors MacIntyre diagnoses in thinkers who belong to encyclopedic tradition will be invisible to those thinkers unless they themselves earnestly examine the problems of the tradition. Even if MacIntyre\'92s diagnosis is *correct* -- especially if it is correct -- the readers who especially need to hear it will find the diagnosis unintelligible, even irrational. Insofar as the "patient" finds any parts of his theory intelligible, they will seem radical, disastrous in their social implications, and destructive of the very nature and purpose of education. The reason these appearances will be insuperable to MacIntyre\'92s patient is because the patient is, by his lights, self-deceived. He or she simply denies being part of a tradition, and hence denies having a particular (rather than universal) tradition-bound conception of rationality, and hence denies having a particular, tradition-bound conception of the good (perhaps the good is unbounded freedom to follow the moral law, or to pursue happiness,, and justice unfettered equality). Modernity is the \'93tradition-less tradition\'94 and hence *must* deny tradition to be consistent with itself. \
\
The solution to this paradox is not to browbeat people into admitting that they inhabit a tradition. Rather, he directs the arguments (of *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?*) and others at interlocutors who are already undergoing epistemological crisis. This "patient" comes to MacIntyre with manifesting symptoms. MacIntyre offers one possible diagnosis, and the patient's job is to investigate further. The patient needs philosophical imagination to even *consider* the possibility of another truth. The patient needs patience, intellectual courage, and self-reflection. The patient needs to sit in front of the proverbial mirror and mouth the words, (a) \'93I am part of a tradition\'94 and (b) \'93my tradition might be inadequate,\'94 and (c) \'93that other tradition might have the resources more adequately to address the intellectual and practical problems that I now see are insuperable to my tradition.\'94 The critic who would escape the battery is more likely to flee rather than engage; but the critic who would escape by engaging and overcoming is liable to meet her match. \
\
### The justification of morality by tradition-constituted rationality ###\
\
A third reply is in order here.  D'andrea[@dandrea2006tradition] points out a critique Philippa Foot has leveled against MacIntyre: after all the informative and wide-ranging historical analysis, MacIntyre\'92s account does not solve the \'93problem posed by Plato, and never solved \'85 that of showing the rationality, for any man, of a thorough-going acceptance of the restraints of justice.\'94[@foot1981. This is the \'93problem of immoralism\'94 she tries to address in the final chapter of her *Natural Goodness*.] The challenge of a Nietzsche or Callicles or Thrasymachus lies in their acceptance that the good life for humans *requires* some virtues or requires virtue in some sense but their rejection of the \'93robust concept of justice with its corresponding constraints on action.\'94[@dandrea2006tradition 430]\
\
One response is this: the question \'93why be moral?\'94 is never asked in the abstract. For example, in describing the "self of the heroic age" MacIntyre says, \'93In heroic society there is no 'outside' except that of the stranger. A man who tried to withdraw himself from his given position in heroic society would be engaged in the enterprise of trying to make himself disappear.\'94[@macintyre1984after 126] Even though virtues in twenty-first century North America are not what the same as Homer's day, there is a parallel to be drawn. \
\
Philosophers often ask \'93why be moral?\'94 hypothetically. They ask it *as if* speaking on the skeptic's behalf, or as if *they* were skeptics. But hypothetical moral skeptics will not do. We must consider a concrete character, real or fictional. Once we look for a real or fictional skeptic, a problem arises. By MacIntyre's lights, sincere \'93why be moral?\'94 skeptics are political or social outcasts. For millions of people who are full-fledged members of their tradition, the \'93why be moral?\'94 question will not usually arise. Parents, teachers, religious leaders, politicians, businesses, and non-profit organizations all have a hand in giving each member of the community the tradition out of which the community arises and within which abstract philosophical or pseudo-philosophical worries such as \'93What does it all mean?\'94 do not arise because they are satisfactorily answered.\
\
By contrast, the emergence of the doubt as to whether one should be moral, and the crystallization of the doubt into an articulate challenge, is *a political failure*. The *polis* to which the moral skeptic belongs has failed him. The moral skeptic, likewise, has failed the *polis* which belongs to him or her. So MacIntyre's theory makes room for people who are not actually skeptical (to whom an answer to Foot's challenge is not required) and people who are actually skeptical but do not belong to their society (to whom an answer to Foot's challenge would be meaningless).\
\
MacIntyre's theory makes room for one more group: moral skeptics *are* members of their own tradition but are seeing the problems within their own tradition and who are troubled by a \'93border tradition\'94. This type of skeptic sees the resources of a rival tradition and compares such favorably with the resources of his own tradition. The skeptic is, in a word, entering epistemological crisis. \
\
Specifically, it might be that the moral skeptic has been raised outside of the Aristotelian tradition and is noticing the inadequacies of his or her own tradition, and is entering epistemological crisis. MacIntyre's response is to invite him or her to do the hard work of resolving that crisis by examining, from within the context of a primary tradition *and* a \'93second first\'94 tradition, the problems at hand and the available solutions, working toward an ever greater understanding of the truth. \
\
In short, MacIntyre's theory gives an account of two contradictory phenomena. It explains how a moral skeptic might arise within a community and how that skeptic might be moved to a more adequate grasp of the truth; and it explains why, in healthy, unified, moral societies, *so few people become moral skeptics*.\
\
## 9. Is practical reason 'natural'?\
\
Although it seems practical reason is not natural, it is part of human nature (whether as endemic to human *nature*, not merely second nature, not necessarily supernatural, but primary nature because primary nature is logical or rational will be addressed later)\
\
\
\
## Conclusion\
\
My view is that practical reason is the general human capacity for deciding, through reflection and sensitivity to practical principles, what to do, and for evaluating one's own actions and those of others. Although we can by verbal sleight of hand define practical reasons as 'desires', the judgment of what to do is a distinct mental state from desiring, wanting, wishing, or instinctual attraction. Hence, practical reasons can (and most often do) motivate, all by themselves, even in the absence of desires (etc.); however, desires can (and often do) function as reasons for action. \
\
There are many reasons for action. But the concept of a reason for action is the concept of pursuing what is good or what is best, all things considered. Practical reason runs into quandaries because there are so many reasons for action, and they sometimes conflict.  Some have to do with what is best for me, what is best for others, what is best for me and what is best for me later, what is permissable and what is required, etc. Although we may want to reserve the word 'moral' for other-regarding reasons, it is important to keep in mind that our goal of living well demands sensitivity to a whole range of reasons, regarding self, other, world, and (perhaps) God. \
\
\
>I entertain the unfriendly suspicion that those who feel they *must* seek more than  [the Aristotelian view of practical reason] provides want a scientific theory of rationality not so much for a passion for science, even where there can be no science, but because they hope and desire, by some conceptual alchemy, to turn such a theory into a regulative or normative discipline, or into a system of rules by which to spare themselves some of the agony of thinking and all the torment of feeling and understanding that is actually involved in reasoned deliberation.[@wiggins1975deliberation\
\
There are two specific normative conclusions I would like to make. I want to avoid the accusation that practical wisdom, as the argument stands at present, is an empty formality devoid of moral substance. As we saw in an earlier chapter, it might seem that the injunction: "pursue practical wisdom!" amounts to a truism that wisdom (which is a good) is a good. \
\
The first particular normative conclusion is that truth is valuable. Often times one hears "education" praised as a panacea. Education, we are told, without any further definition to the term, is supposed to solve American economic problems, lift people out of poverty, reduce crime in inner cities, enrich students personally, lead to technological advances and medical breakthroughs, subvert and correct systematic gender inequalities, and more. But unless the education a student receives consists in *knowledge* of *truth*, we can hardly expect that these exaggerated hopes be fulfilled. \
\
A second particular normative conclusion is that young people in particular should not engage in conjugal activity outside of the bonds of legal marriage. Conjugal activity is a powerful part of life and part of the human experience. There are moral, prudential, legal, psychological, economic, social, and biological reasons to keep such a powerful force within safe bounds. Morally, moral authorities from Moses, Cicero, Socrates, St. Paul, Confucius, Epicurus, Thomas Aquinas, and many more urge chastity and conjugal fidelity. The Mosaic law condemns adulterers to death but if an unmarried man sleeps with an unmarried woman they are not to be punished; they are to marry. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
#Virtue as Realizing our Natural Human Telos\
\
"The human virtues make their possessor good qua human being, one who is as ordinarily well fitted as a human being can be in not merely physical respects to live well, to flourish\'97in a characteristically human way."[@hursthouse1998virtue 208]\
\
>It has often been suggested -- by J. L. Austin, for example -- that either we can admit the existence of rival and contingently incompatible goods which make incompatible claims to our practical allegiance or we can believe in some determinate conception of the good life for man, but that these are mutually exclusive alternatives. No one can consistently hold both these views. What this contention is blind to is that there may be better or worse ways for individuals to live through the tragic confrontation of good with good. And that to know what the good life for man is may require knowing what are the better and what are the worse ways of living in and through such situations. Nothing a priori rules out this possibility; and this suggests that within a view such as Austin's there is concealed an unacknowledged empirical premise about the character of tragic situations.[@macintyre1984after 223-4]\
\
>But what could this fifth end be? Tradition offers us a few alternatives. We might say that the fifth end was the preparation of our souls for the life hereafter, or that it was contemplation\'97the good functioning of the theoretical intellect. But to adopt the first is to go beyond naturalism towards supernaturalism, and even philosophers have baulked at following Aristotle and endorsing the second. I am not in a position to assert that there is no fifth end peculiarly appropriate to our rationality, but no plausible candidate suggests itself and I will suggest instead that the genuinely transforming effect of our rationality on the basic structure adequately registers the \'91huge gap\'92 that exists between us and the other animals.[@hursthouse1998virtue 218]\
\
## Summary\
\
**Chapter 5. Virtues as partly constituting the realization of our natural human telos.** This chapter presents an account of human teleology as partly achievable through the virtues. I distinguish various senses of telos and consider several potential specifications of this indeterminate concept. There is traditionally some link between virtues and the human telos whether eudaimonia, flourishing, thriving, welfare, etc.[@brown2008virtue is not a eudaimonist, but alleges that virtues do contribute to the realization of the human telos of reproduction.] Bentham and Nietzsche, among others, mock this alleged role.[Cf. @annas2011intelligent] The questions I am to answer are: What is our telos and how do virtues relate to it?[@annas1993morality; @adams2006 chapter 4; @mcdowell1980role] If virtues to bring about happiness, again, is that just egoism?[@huang2010self] Is there even a telos for humanity, or is there no sense in speaking of a *human function*?[@murdoch1998sovereignty; @brown2008 chapter 2; @macintyre1984after, chapter 5] How relevant to ethics is human "metaphysical biology\'94?[@brown2008virtue chapter 3 and 4; @mcdowell1998two] Is ethics partly dependent on our animal nature[@macintyre1999dependent; @bailey2015animalism; @barham2011] or solely on our rationality?[@mcdowell1996mind; @foot2001natural] Are virtues necessary for true or "deep happiness"[@foot2001natural chapter 6] or are they necessary and sufficient?[@annas2005naturalism] Is it possible to be virtuous and miserable?  What is misery? Can we know happiness without knowing whether or not there is an after life? Virtue partly constitutes human flourishing but does not completely constitute it, because luck and fortune out of our control have a real impact on our happiness and our objective flourishing.\
\
\
## Introduction \
 \
**Thesis:** Virtue partially constitutes human flourishing (the realization of our human telos); there is a human telos, and virtue partially constitutes it. It *only partially* constitutes it.\
\
**A quote**:  *\'93What use would it be if a man had the wisdom of Nestor and wanted the necessaries of life, food and drink and clothes and the like? Where would be the advantage of wisdom then?\'94 Eryxias, in the dialogue Eryxias (attributed to Plato)*\
\
\
\
\
### The problems addressed in this chapter\
\
The theme if our present chapter is to puzzle through one of the most difficult ethical questions: why be good? If the conclusions from the previous inquiry were on the mark, then we can rephrase this question without a change of meaning: why is virtue (especially practical wisdom) necessary for human flourishing? This is the same question, since, \'93virtue\'94 (especially practical wisdom) is what *good* is for creatures like us; and \'93human flourishing\'94 is  a name for, ex hypothesis, that indeterminate concept of the one thing worth pursuing. The question \'93why be good?\'94 or \'93why be virtuous?\'94 should not be taken as the irrational question in the vicinity: \'93why do anything at all? Why be motivate?\'94 Such a question is practical irrationality unadulterated, as we saw with Melville\'92s Bartleby. The preference not to do anything \'97 or the lack of preference to do anything \'97 is inhuman \'93madness\'94 or mental illness. \
\
>Now this can easily be made to seem a strange worry. The thought that virtue is sufficient for happiness or flourishing is apt to produce Aristotle\'92s response: you can\'92t be serious. But if you accept that a flourishing life isn\'92t just one in which you have lots of stuff, or one in which you get success by any means \'96 if, that is, you accept that wicked or selfish people do not in fact flourish, so that only those who live virtuously have a chance of flourishing \'96 then a problem does emerge as to why virtue is not sufficient for flourishing. For it is up to me whether I live virtuously, or at least try to, but Aristotelian theories accept that even if I do the best I can I may still be deprived of happiness by factors that are beyond my control. For Aristotle, happiness is a hybrid combination of living virtuously and of achieving a measure of success in worldly terms. The latter is not under my control, and cannot be guaranteed.[Annas, "Virtue Ethics: What Kind of Naturalism?" in @gardiner2005virtue]\
\
\
### Some points\
\
Flourishing-- minimally, social and individual learning, knowledge, pleasure, survival, pleasure, and maximally eternal life and glory. \
- it is not intolerant\
Teleology-- our natural end is flourishing.\
- it is not supernatural\
- It is not merely animal\
\
### The importance of telos\
\
That teleology is important has been one of the central contentions of this dissertation. \
\
\
### Telos\
\
\'93Teleological ethics\'94 was taken, especially a decade or two ago, to contrast with deontological ethics and to refer to utilitarianism.[@louden1984vices 227] Teleology then means simply that the utilitarian aims to achieve some end \'97 happiness, pleasure, utility, or what have you. Thus understood, virtue theorists seem to be utilitarians whose primary concern is the character of moral agents rather than the acts moral agents perform or the rules they obey. But this is a misunderstanding. \
\
Teleological ethics of the sort that concerns Anscombe (and concerns us in these chapters) is not a matter of a posteriori, statistical analyses of character traits or actions or rules and their respective consequences aimed at reliably hitting the target by consistently bringing about the cause. Teleological ethics is about unfolding the inner form of a thing; actualizing its inherent or intrinsic telos. This process of self-realization occurs in all living things, from the smallest bacterium to the largest whale. It does not (at least I shall assume it does not) occur in any non-living thing; there is no teleological, goal-oriented process guiding the development of new solar systems or the destructions of old ones; there is no \'93cosmic ecology\'94 because there is no cosmic ecosystem. The cosmic relation between star and asteroid is more akin to the terrestrial relation between gas and matter than the terrestrial relation between bear and butterfly. \
\
My thesis is simply that virtues, especially intellectual virtues like practical wisdom, are partially constitutive of human eudaimonia; that these truths are solid enough foundation to build an ethical theory on, even without appealing to divine revelation; and that no worries from Darwinism, metaphysical naturalism, or Moorman non-naturalism are enough to crack that foundation. \
\
### Telos and deontic necessity\
\
Telos is the Greek concept of end, purpose, direction, limit, fulfillment, destination. It is pretty clear that human beings set ends for themselves, undertake projects, chart courses in a particular direction, and so on. To say that there is a \'93given\'94 telos for humanity is to suggest that there is at least one or a set of ends \'93built in\'94.[@geach1977virtues, chapter 1] Put crudely, there are some goals we *ought* to have regardless of our other goals; or perhaps more accurately, the concept of inbuilt teleology suggests that there are some ends we *simply have* by virtue of being human.  The question then becomes how to coordinate our chosen ends and our \'93given\'94 ends. This question is by no means easy. However, I shall take a stab at it. \
\
One way that moral philosophers (divine command theorists and Kantians, for instance) answer the question of the relation between our inbuilt ends and our chosen ends is to suggest that our inbuilt ends are \'93categorical imperatives\'94 \'97 that is, imperatives that are obligatory and authoritatively binding regardless of our chosen ends. The divine command theorist sees laws of God being objectively binding on all human beings. The Kantian substitutes a divine law for an autonomous, self-given law that each rational agent necessarily imposes upon oneself. However, each of these theories makes the law a brute obligation, a necessity without further conditions. \
\
The virtue theorists I am discussing \'97 and in some cases defending \'97 take a different approach. Rather than treating the moral law as a divine \'93positive law\'94 or a law of practical reason as such, they treat moral laws such as they are as laws of nature. Of course, these are not \'93descriptive\'94 laws of nature, like the law of universal gravitation. It is a brute prescriptive law arising from the nature of humans as such. Now, since humans are (as I shall argue) rational animals, my view aligns rather closely with Kant\'92s. However, I take a different line of argument on the controversy Kant had with Reinhold and others about whether or not one can freely choose to disobey the moral law. Kant thought one could not, since he defined \'93freedom\'94 as conformity to the moral law (rather than conformity to natural, selfish, law of inclination or egoism). My view is closer to Reinhold\'92s on this point, in that I think that our natural law is objectively prescriptive and binding, and in some sense defines who we *already are*, but that it is given to us to fulfill. We must align our chosen end with our given end. Failing to achieve our given end is, by definition, human misery. So even if I am \'93successful\'94 in achieving my chosen ends, I shall be necessarily miserable if my chosen ends are radically opposed to my given ends. \
\
But more on these things below.\
\
\
\
### Three characters, one successful, one virtuous, one both successful and virtuous\
\
The first character I should like to keep before our imagination is the Successful Man: wealthy, powerful, influential, well-connected, owning lots of land, designer clothes, and jets. This is Bruce Wayne, Donald Trump, or Hilary Clinton. We can playfully imagine them furthermore in the peak of life in beauty, health, and vigor. Whether or not this person is virtuous seems to be beside the point: they are Successful. They may not be wise but they enjoy the richness of the \'93aesthetic life.\'94\
\
The second character is the Scrappy Sage: even though these wise, unyielding in principle, scrupulous, discerning, practical, reliable,  beneficent, large-minded, generous, unflappable, just, undeceived and undeceivable, undistracted by petty pleasures, and far-sighted regarding the affairs of this life. This is Diogenes, Symeon Stylites, or John the Baptist who were despised for their lack of Success but admired and sought out for their Sagacity. They are ascetic sages but rejecting the aesthetic and embracing the \'93ethical life.\'94 \
\
The third is a combination of worldly success and virtuous sagacity: wealthy but wise, powerful but unyielding in principle, influential but scrupulous, well-connected by discerning, full of possessions but practical. This is King Solomon, Cato the Younger, or St. Katherine of Sienna. \
\
The question \'91why be good?\'92 is asked by someone who is earnestly in doubt as to whether it is better to be more like Solomon or St. Katherine than like Donald Trump or Hilary Clinton. They might agree that virtue and success together are better than virtue and no success; they are earnestly in doubt as to whether it would be better to have success without virtue or virtue without success. So the question \'93why be good?\'94 is not the question \'93Why be motivated at all?\'94 but \'93why not be motivated, after all, by success with or without virtue?\'92. \
\
This question is echoed by Eryxias: even supposing someone were as wise as Nestor, wouldn\'92t such a person be miserable without food and drink and clothes and the like? What *advantage* is wisdom? The assumption here is that the meaning of  \'93advantage\'94 is advantage for *us* here and now, not just abstract admirable qualities. \
\
If virtues is partly constitutive of flourishing (even \'93success\'94), then the question \'91why be virtuous?\'92 is close \'97 if not identical \'97 to the irrational question \'91why do what is worth doing?\'92. It is a conceptual confusion. However, if virtue is not constitutive of flourishing, then the question of whether *I* really ought to let virtue be the over overriding practical consideration instead of the alluring temptations of wealth, riches, sex, and power in however great of quantities I can achieve. \
\
So my first thesis in this chapter, is this: virtue causes human flourishing but also partly constitutes it. This is my first step toward solving the problem of why be good. \
\
Many neo-Aristotelians use \'93flourishing\'94 to translate the untranslatable \'93eudaimonia.\'94 Eudaimonia is the human telos. telos is, of course, Greek for "end". The word is bursting with dizzying array of possible meanings, including "definite point", "goal", "purpose," "cessation," "order," "prize," "highest point", "realization", "decision", and "services."[@liddell1896intermediate compare with Strong's 5056: "telos tel'-os from a primary tello (to set out for a definite point or goal); properly, the point aimed at as a limit, i.e. (by implication) the conclusion of an act or state (termination (literally, figuratively or indefinitely), result (immediate, ultimate or prophetic), purpose); specially, an impost or levy (as paid); continual, custom, end(-ing), finally, uttermost."] There are at least two kinds of teleology we can distinguish between: natural and social.[@barham2011] Natural teleology is not *intentional*. Social teleology is. The type of teleology the Aristotelian tradition takes for granted is natural teleology, of which social teleology is an instance in human rational creatures. \
\
So our telos is eudaimonia. What is eudaimonia? Answering this question is treacherously difficult. \'93Religious\'94 pagans like Aristotle thought it was the intellectual life of an (Athenian) gentlemen. Christians like Aquinas think it is the beatific vision of God after this life is over, including the time after a bodily resurrection. Atheists and other noble secularists such as Russell and Murdoch think that eudaimonia is a particular kind of virtuous and wise life here and now, despite the coming darkness. (Less noble secularists opt for cocaine, sex, whisky, heroine.) These are different reactions, but both are reactions to formalized despair. On a happier note, or perhaps equally anxious note, Ray Kurzweil and other transhumanists think that even this life can be extended, perhaps a little, perhaps a lot, which would afford more time to explore just what eudaimonia might be. I do not here bother to mention theories of reincarnation Is there any way to coordinate these views? \
\
Virtues play some important part in happiness, unless the immoralist consents to the despairing notion that if death ends all, then life is meaningless and so eat drink and be merry. \
\
The old Stoic line was the noble belief that virtue is *all* of eudaimonia. There is nothing more to be desired but virtue; \'93virtue is it\'92s own reward.\'94 The Aristotelian line was, not surprisingly, a bit more human. The life of virtuous activity is necessary but not sufficient for eudaimonia. Also needed are money, friends, and some good fortune. In a sense, the fully virtuous man or woman could be a victim to the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune and lose all. But this is just a way of saying that tragedies can indeed happen. Socrates would, with superhuman stubbornness, deny it. *Nothing* can harm the good man; and nothing save the bad one.\
\
### Minimal and Maximal Conceptions\
\
I would also like to distinguish between minimal conceptions and maximal conceptions of happiness. A minimal conception includes a necessary condition or set of necessary conditions the absence of which plausible constitutes *misery*. Peter Geach alludes to this kind of conception when he argues that only a broad basis of ethical agreement is needed for two groups to work together on building a hospital or running a university.[@geach1977virtues] Alasdair MacIntyre\'92s conception of telos in *After Virtue* is what I have called \'93minimal\'94. A maximal conception of happiness is more imaginative, certainly, but more divisive. A maximal conception imagines what state of affairs or what human activity constitutes *full and completely satisfying human life* \'97 fulfillment to the highest imaginable degree. Boethius pretty clearly aims for this kind of conception when he argues that the good of man is complete self-sufficiency and hence cannot but any \'93false happiness\'94 such as wealth, power, or pleasure but must be participation in God himself.^[*Consolation of Philosophy*, Book III.] \
\
Natural law theorists like to talk about \'91perfections\'92 of nature, and happiness as \'91perfect\'92 or complete. I prefer the term \'91maximal\'92 to \'91perfective\'92 for two reasons. First, the concept of maximum is relative to circumstances; one should aim to be as happy as possible *given the limitations of time*. This clause includes theist and atheists in the conversation since they may disagree on just what the limitations of time are but agree that we should aim to be as happy as possible. Secondly, the notion of perfection implies that human nature has natural limits of happiness, a terminus. I\'92m not sure this is true. It might be that, so long as one lives well, and so long as the average lifespan of western industrial peoples continues to increase. Is there a natural limit, for instance, to how many languages one can learn? I know three languages. With enough time before my biological end, couldn\'92t I learn ten? Someone more gifted with languages already knows ten and could learn twenty. If they lived 200 years, couldn\'92t they learn thirty languages? Is there a natural limit to wisdom? Can one become fully wise and then stop? Continuing the discussion using the notion of relative maximum keeps the case open on this issue. \
\
\
## MacIntyre\
\
### *After Virtue*\
\
MacIntyre is retiring and coy about what he thinks our telos might be. All he will say is the minimal definition: we ought to be free to pursue our telos. Virtue enables this. What more our telos might consist in I do not know that he cares to speculate. \
\
### *Dependent Rational Animals*\
\
*Dependent Rational Animals* is a more ambitious book in some respects. MacIntyre aims to build a broader account of virtues by attending to not only our independence but our dependence. Much of our dependence on each other stems from our animality: periods of gestation, infancy, old age, and illness all make us dependent on our fellow creatures. \
\
\
### telos ###\
\
John Horton and Susan Mendus summarize the contrast the two understandings of the self well enough to quote them in full:\
\
>Where Aristotle understood man as a creature with a definite function which he might fulfill or deny, modern morality sees man simply as a rational agent who has no true or definable purpose independent of his own will... By appealing to a telos, Aristotle was able to distinguish between the way we actually are and the way we should be. His conception of human beings as having a specific telos brought with it the possibility that we might fall short of the ideal... But with the rejection of Aristotelianism gain the rejection of any such distinction between what we are and what we should be. Post-Enlightenment man is seen as governed, not by a telos external to him, but simply by the dictates of his own inner reason... Thus the abandonment of an Aristotelian conception of the good has not only left us without standards by which to evaluate our moral arguments, it is also cast us adrift in the moral world. For Aristotle, a conception of the good for man has an essentially societal dimension.[@horton2015 6]  \
\
For MacIntyre, the loss of telos  is one of the chief if not the chief error of Enlightenment moralities. He explains why in his discussion of the three elements of morality.[@macintyre1984after 54ff] The first element is "untutored human nature" (as it is). The second element is human nature (as it could be, should be). The third element is the set of properties needed to move from the first to the second points. Moral rules or admirable character traits are the content of morality; but the telos of humanity is the context of morality. It quite literally makes the content of morality make sense. Understanding "human-nature-as-it-is"[@macintyre1984after 55] is a task for philosophers, as well as psychologists, sociologists, anthropologists, etc. Understanding human nature "man-as-he-could-be-if-he-realized-his-telos"[@macintyre1984after 55] was "the whole point of ethics."  It is difficult to understate the importance of this point about the self and its relation to not only virtue theory but ethical theory itself. Edward Oakes describes the removal of telos from our worldview as \'93perhaps the greatest category mistake ever made in the history of philosophy.\'94\
\
>That word \'93teleological\'94 is the key to MacIntyre\'92s solution, the loss of which is the cause of the catastrophe described in his science-fiction parable. Teleology is the study of final causes, goals, purposes, and aims: a style of explanation that saturates Aristotle\'92s philosophy. After the combined impact of Newton and Darwin, however, this type of explanation seems mostly 'quaint' and once Aristotle\'92s science seemed quaint, his ethics soon followed: when Newton demonstrated how motion can be better explained as resulting from the outcome of mechanical laws, and when Darwin posited natural selection as the \'93mechanism\'94 for explaining an organ\'92s functionality, the use of teleology in ethics was doomed...Emptying moral discourse of teleological concepts because of the perceived impact of Newton and Darwin has been for MacIntyre the catastrophe of our times.[@oakes1996] \
\
Now, MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue is \'93neo-Aristotelian\'94 in that it borrows from but also contrast with Aristotle\'92s. For instance, MacIntyre denies that Aristotle\'92s virtues are so timeless, abstract, and generically human as Aristotle would make them appear; they are partly indexed to fourth century, upper-class, educated Athenian culture. He also rejects Aristotle's metaphysics of nature. Nevertheless, he argues, the loss of a concept of telos is dramatic.  MacIntyre's provisional conception of our human telos is this:  \'93The good life for man is the life spent in seeking for the good life for man, and the virtues necessary for the seeking are those which will enable us to understand what more and what else the good life for man is."[@macintyre1984after 210] Our telos is to be free to pursue our telos. MacIntyre is not a straightforward eudaemonist; this conception of the human telos is more vague than Aristotle's. Whatever the human telos turns out to be, it minimally includes the freedom to explore "what else" the telos might be. \
\
For now, it is not vacuous to conclude that the virtues needed to achieve this (extremely indeterminate) goal themselves indirectly make room for and might directly illumine \'93what else\'94 our telos consists in. The virtues needed to preserve the quest for the good, he suggests, may illumine \'93what else\'94 our telos consists in. It may turn out (and his later writings are more explicit about it) that the determinate telos of a given tradition is a more determinate conception of eudaimonia. \
\
\
### telos objections\
\
One family of objections pertains to teleology. If MacIntyre's suggestion that we need to recover the Aristotelian tradition of the virtues is to be taken as a serious plan, then we must recover telos, for without a clear telos even a high moral earnestness attached to virtues devolves into an unintelligible set of rules or traditions. Virtue without telos literally has no point.[^16] This constellation of objections is, I think, most potentially disastrous for MacIntyre's theory, and the objections are powerful.[^15] \
\
[^15]: Yet in addition to the real philosophical difficulty of the matter, the prejudices and misconceptions surrounding teleology are so thick one would need several chapters to dig through the muck and mire. I think an adequate response can, ultimately, be made. \
\
[^16]:A society that enforces chaste behavior and honors chastity as a virtue but does so without any understanding of how such chastity fits into the fulfilled life of a fully virtuous human being and a fully virtuous community will be open to the criticism that such behaviors and virtues are prohibiting a whole range of pleasurable activities.\
\
In this section I shall present three objections from teleology that are especially problematic for MacIntyre's narrative. The first objection regarding teleology is to deny MacIntyre's historical narrative. Oakes above eloquently summarized MacIntyre's criticism of  the loss of telos in modern moral philosophy, natural science, psychology, and ethics. But perhaps modern moral philosophy is not so anti-teleological as all that. Kant's categorical imperative, much vaunted for its austere duty for the sake of duty, is actually aimed at perfection.[@ward1971kant] Keith Ward argued with some impatience almost 40 years ago (10 years before *After Virtue*'s first edition) that Kant should not be interpreted as commending duty as some abstract, context-free obligation. He says: \
\
>Kant's position is not merely that one must conceive oneself as setting up a purposive order of Nature, according to universal laws, as though one could arbitrarily choose anything whatsoever as one's purpose. One can see this if one takes Kant's list of examples of moral duties in the *Metaphysic of Morals* [sic]. Masturbation is against the *purposes of Nature*, in forming the sexual organs; suicide contravenes *Nature's purpose* in establishing self-love in order to preserve life... Finally, "holiness of will" must be pursued, as this expresses the absolute worth of the human person, in its freedom from sensuous impulses and its transcendence of Nature.[@ward1971kant 341] \
\
These quotes from the allegedly dour-faced deontologist certainly sound awfully similar to Aristotle (not to mention St. Paul). Along similar lines, Kantian ethicist David Cummiskey has argued that Kant can be understood as a consequentialist of sorts.[@cummiskey1996kantian] The proposal is that Kant's *justification* for moral normative principles was a brute, formal, categorical imperative, but the *content* of such normative principles included agents and the goods they aim to attain. Happiness can be valued as an imperfect duty, though rational agency must be valued as a perfect duty. Without entering into all the interesting details at this juncture, the thought is that perhaps a (thoroughly modern) moral philosophy like deontology can be synthesized with natural teleology. \
\
The other putatively modern moral philosophy that comes in for criticism for MacIntyre, Anscombe, et. al., is Mill's utilitarianism. But isn't consequentialism teleological in the proper sense of telos. Clearly, consequences are *ends* of actions -- I go to work *in order to* earn a paycheck at the end of the month; the consequence (my paycheck) is the goal or purpose or point of the action (going to work). For consequentialism, the great intrinsic value is happiness, or pleasure. On the surface, this sounds like a kind of Aristotelian eudaimonism. But Aristotle's eudaimonia is the necessary end of all action and all practical reasoning. The proof that we pursue eudaimonia (something vague) is as robust as the proof that we pursue *anything at all*.[@aristotle Book I.1] Similarly, all that Mill can say to the enquirer who wants to hear about *why* happiness is desirable is that people desire it.[@mill chapter 4. *Of what sort of Proof the Principle of Utility is Susceptible*. He says, "The only proof capable of being given that an object is visible, is that people actually see it. The only proof that a sound is audible, is that people hear it: and so of the other sources of our experience. In like manner, I apprehend, the sole evidence it is possible to produce that anything is desirable, is that people do actually desire it. If the end which the utilitarian doctrine proposes to itself were not, in theory and in practice, acknowledged to be an end, nothing could ever convince any person that it was so. No reason can be given why the general happiness is desirable, except that each person, so far as he believes it to be attainable, desires his own happiness."] So perhaps virtue ethics can be synthesized with consequentialism. \
\
\
A second objection regarding teleology grants MacIntyre's pessimistic narrative. Ethics can get along well enough without intrinsic *teloi*. We cannot accept natural teleology since this notion has been exorcised from natural science (and from all rational philosophy) by Darwin and Newton. Bernard Williams summarizes this feeling well: \
\
>It seems to me that a correct understanding of evolution is relevant to projects of this kind, but that the effect of that understanding is largely discouraging to them... the idea of a naturalistic ethics was born of a deeply teleological outlook, and its best expression, in many ways, is to be found in Aristotle's philosophy, a philosophy according to which there is inherent in each natural kind of thing an appropriate way for things of that kind to behave... The first and hardest lesson of Darwinism, that there is no such teleology at all, and that there is no orchestral score provided from anywhere according to which human beings have a special part to play, still has to find its way fully into ethical thought.[@williams1995making]\
\
Williams' objection is a general objection from metaphysical naturalism to *any* form of naturalistic ethics. Rosalind Hursthouse says that, "From early on, Williams has expressed pessimism about the project of Aristotelian naturalism on the grounds that Aristotle's conception of nature, and thereby human nature, was normative, and that, in a scientific age, this is not a conception that we can take on board."[@hursthouse1998virtue 256] His objection is ostensibly against the notion of natural teleology but also against a realist notion of human nature as well. If humanity as it is today is a more or less jumbled "bricolage" of adaptive parts, it is hardly a secure enough entity to ground ethical obligations. \
\
Thankfully, morality can function without it. The moral law *by itself* guides or forms our actions without a natural telos performing that function. For example, Christine Korsgaard's "Authority of Reflection"[@korsgaard1996authority] builds a case that human autonomy -- the ability to be a law to oneself -- is the source of normative authority. How does this work? My own identity as a human being obligates me to behave morally. She argues that "autonomy is the source of obligation" and that "we have *moral* obligations... to humanity as such."[@korsgaard1996authority 93] Because I am self-reflective, I am accountable for what I do. Also because I am self-reflective, I have a self-conception. She says the "thinking self" regulates the "acting self." Korsgaard's notion of practical identity is that we assume identities such as human being, child, parent, teacher, etc. Each identity is functional; it grounds obligations. If I am really to be a teacher, I must show up for class. If I really am to be a parent, I must feed and educate my child. Practical identities may be more or less contingent. All of us are children; not all of us educators. At least one practical identity is necessary. That is our practical identity *as humans*. Humans "need to have practical conceptions of our identity in order to act and live."[@korsgaard1996authority 106] The fact is, we do act and live. Therefore we do have a moral identity. Put another way, she says: \'93Rational action is possible only if human beings find their own humanity to be valuable.\'94[@korsgaard1996authority 106] The moral identity is one in which I take up a viewpoint as a member of the "Kingdom of Ends", the community of those who also have a moral identity. So the moral law delivers content-full moral duties derived from my own autonomously legislated rules prescribed by my valuing humanity; these rules are not teleological in that they require any future fulfillment of an end to validate them. \
\
The point of these objections is to push back on MacIntyre's narrative in which our modern liberal tradition excised telos. Either we did not do so, or (even if we did) we could get along without it. \
\
These three objections -- about relativism, tradition-constituted rationality, and teleology -- are some of the most telling against MacIntyre's theory. In the discussion section I shall attempt to answer each one. \
\
\
\
\
\
### Telos is not natural but social ###\
\
One objection above stated that teleology (understood as *natural* teleology) is outmoded by Darwinian modern science. While the later MacIntyre (in *Dependent Rational Animals* especially) might want to ground morality in the biological or otherwise natural features of human animals, the early MacIntyre can sidestep this conversation. Since we will discuss natural teleology in other chapters, I think it wise here to argue the more modest point. \
\
All MacIntyre needs to build his virtue theory on human nature is social teleology. We know that *human society is teleological.* We act to achieve goals. Whether we arise from bed *in order to* give a talk, or drive to work *in order to* do a good job, or pursue a career *for* satisfaction and a profitable retirement, we are directing ourselves toward ends. In groups, too, we deliberate about what to do, about *what is to be done*. We pursue group goals. We are directed at group ends. Congress aims to pass just and beneficial laws. The school board aims to increase enrollment and balance the budget.  Our social practices *just are* intelligibly teleological. They cannot be understood without teleology. \
\
We can put the point more strongly: all of human life is a practice. It can be brought under the concept of either one, unified, whole practice or pluralistic set of practices. Human life is, at least viewed under this concept, therefore teleological and indispensably so. Iris Murdoch argued as much in her famous \'93The Sovereignty of Good over other Concepts.\'94[@murdoch1998sovereignty] Even if human life has \'93no external point or \uc0\u964 \u949 \u955 \u959 \u962 \'94, it has one *from within.** We pursue projects. It is impossible, in other words, to bring our own human life under the concept of an *event.* This insight has important implications for ethics, as well as other fields: action theory, sociology, anthropology, philosophy of mind, and so on.[@thompson2008life. One example is Michael Thompson's philosophy of action or what he calls \'93practical philosophy\'94. His assumption-trouncing work contains remarkable depth of insight and simple yet dramatic conclusions. Thompson argues that the concepts of practice, action, and life are successively larger conceptual spheres, where the latter includes the former, but where the former is constitutive of the latter. And upon reflection, each concept exhibits an undeniable Aristotelian structure. Modern theoretical and practical philosophies that obscure these concepts or miss the mark obstruct progress in practical philosophy. While I cannot do justice to Thompson\'92s admirable work here, I mention it to point out that MacIntyre\'92s thesis about \'93social teleology\'94 \'97 the irreducibly teleological or end-directed nature of individual and group human activities \'97 seems correct.] If the objector accepts social teleology, then MacIntyre can rest his case.  \
\
\
### telos is needed ###\
\
One objection above stated that telos is indeed a necessary part of morality, but that it can be found in modern morality, for instance, in Kantian or consequentialist morality. If the sense of teleology we are using here is merely social and not natural, then MacIntyre would respond, "so much the better for Kant." Moral rules are unintelligible without an understanding of the *internal* or *necessary* relation between some actions and some outcomes. Kant himself, perhaps, understood this better than many of his contemporary readers give him credit. \
\
\
### telos is not needed ###\
\
Consequentialism, however, cannot be made to be "teleological" in the Aristotelian or the MacIntyrean sense. The first reason is that, For Mill, happiness is something too specific: pleasure, or freedom from pain. He offers precious little justification for this. Mill's definition of happiness cannot be that thing we all necessarily pursue whenever we act, because then moral rules (guiding us toward the happiness of the greatest number) would be unnecessary. We would all, already, pursue happiness. \
\
The second reason is more important: The reason is that Mill and others define "consequences" so as to be always contingent. Mill, like Moore, sees the relation between the end (happiness) and the means (actions that bring about happiness) as statistical, contingent, and probable. There is no internal relation between some actions (such as virtues) and the proper end of human life.\
\
Take as a few examples this statement from G.E. Moore: \
\
>What ought we to do?  The answering of this question constitutes the third great division of ethical enquiry; and its nature was briefly explained in Chap. I (\'a7\'a7 15\'9717). It introduces into Ethics, as was there pointed out, an entirely new question\'97the question what things are related as *causes* to that which is good in itself; and this question can only be answered by an entirely new method\'97the method of empirical investigation; by means of which causes are discovered in the other sciences. *To ask what kind of actions we ought to perform, or what kind of conduct is right, is to ask what kind of effects such action and conduct will produce.* Not a single question in practical Ethics can be answered except by a causal generalization. All such questions do, indeed, also involve an ethical judgment proper\'97the judgment that certain effects are better, in themselves, than others. But they do assert that these better things are effects\'97are causally connected with the actions in question. Every judgment in practical Ethics may be reduced to the form: This is a cause of that good thing.[@moore Chapter 5, Section 89, my emphasis.]\
\
Moore is explicit here that there are no acts that have intrinsic value (qua duty or qua virtuous deed); acts only have value insofar as they cause good effects. This good effects are, for Moore, aesthetic enjoyments, knowledge, and friendships.[@moore Chapter 6.] \
\
I said above that the refusal to treat the means/end distinction as clean and absolute is liable to cause his critics to misunderstand his position. Charles Taylor endorses the notion that \'93the place accorded the virtues [is] a kind of litmus test for discriminating Aristotelian from modern ethical theory.\'94[@taylor 25] He explains this feature of modern moral theories:\
\
>...They cannot abide this kind of relation, in which one element is both cause and constituent of another. It is a central demand of one influential construal of modern reason that one clearly sort out means from ends. For utilitarians, the good is happiness, and virtues can only be good instrumentally... If the basic point of morality is to do the right actions, then the virtues must be seen as purely executive. They cannot also be seen as part of the end, because the end is not defined that way.[@taylor 25] \
\
What could this mean? Behind the means/end distinction is a peculiarly modern assumption that formal and final causes are either not related or not *necessarily* related. But the assumption is unreasonable. Exercise *causes* (efficient causes) health; but it is partly constitutive of health. In other words, exercise *causes* (formal causes) health.  The relation between a formal cause and a final cause is an internal, natural, and necessary relation. In biology, the distinction between form and function is a real one but the two are related.^[@huneman2006naturalising. Huneman summarizes the "two poles" in the history of biology: "the concept of form and the concept of function." For Huneman, anatomy studies form and physiology studies function. He explains how Kant understood both poles and tried to give due weight to the mechanistic understanding of organisms *and* to the distinctive features of organic life. Humean, Kant, and evolutionary biologists are obliged to explain both form and function as real without reducing one to the other.] The relation between the species *gorilla gorilla* as instantiated in an infant gorilla and a fully grown, mature one is an internal and natural and (given the proper circumstances) a necessary relation. To deny that there are formal causes, or to deny that there are final causes, is simply to beg the question against teleological ethics. \
\
For these reasons, consequentialism of the typical sort that *reduces* the question of what actions, rules, or character traits are good to a question that cannot "be answered except by a causal generalization" is not teleological in the required sense. The character traits that tend to bring about happiness must also be, in a sense, pre-payments on that happiness. \
\
\
### Section conclusion ###\
\
In sum, the rebuttal of the \'93no teleology objection" is that the sort of teleology we need is defensible: social teleology. Social teleology does not *necessarily* offend against Darwinian biology, evolutionary psychology, or metaphysical naturalism, but can (and must) be accommodated by them. Furthermore, Kantian philosophy may be able to accommodate social teleology, and so would escape the brunt of MacIntyre's criticism laid out in his narrative. On the other hand, the rebuttal of consequentialism, is that it has not often been taken to allow for a necessary relation between some means and their ends. Virtuous action both *causes* and *partly constitutes* virtuous character. Virtuous character traits both *cause* and *partly constitute* the kind of achievement of our human telos that makes life worth living. \
\
\
\
\
\
\
### McDowell on Eudaimonia\
\
McDowell takes the old Stoic line that virtues just *are* eudaimonia. There is nothing more \'93external\'94 to it, certainly nothing external. \
\
\
\
## Foot\
\
Foot argues that happiness is \'93deep satisfaction.\'94 This is compatible with, say, an extremely uncomfortable and even tragic life, like Wittgenstein\'92s. It is not compatible with superficial satisfaction, the froth of pleasure and tittering mirth that floats on a shallow waters. It must be \'93deep\'94, by which I suppose she means that it stands up to our own reflections in a sober hour. \
\
## My View on Telos\
\
### Questions to be Answered\
\
### 1. What if there are no ends in nature? ##\
\
One powerful objection to the recovery of telos is that there is no teleology in nature. There are no *ends* (\uc0\u964 \u949 \u955 \u959 \u953 ). Call this position *teleological nihilism.* There are two forms of teleological nihilism: extreme and moderate. Extreme teleological nihilism we may call the view that there are no "purposes" or natural ends anywhere in the world *including* in human actions. Even our practices, behaviors, and lives are purposeless, even to ourselves. Moderate teleological nihilism we may call the view that there are no natural purposes *except* those in human actions, intentions, and societies, etc. On moderate teleological nihilism, human purposes are not instances of a broader category that includes the tendency of an acorn to become an oak and the tendency of deer to survive and reproduce; human purposes are sui generis phenomena that spontaneously emerge out of our brains at a certain level of complexity. Final causation thinking is then projected out onto the world by us; we observe that the beaver gathered wood and that the beaver built a dam and we say "the beaver gathered wood *in order to* build the dam." But really the beaver did no such thing. This is what philosopher of biology Ernst Mayr calls "teleonomic" natural behavior, but not genuinely teleological.[@mayr1992teleology] \
\
Teleological nihilism claims as its evidence *modern science* as a whole. Natural sciences have dismissed the notion of final causation for three or four centuries now and have gotten along well without it. In fact, natural sciences and the experimental, empirical methods that advance them have progressed far more than anyone could have dreamed. In part, this success is the result of giving up magical thinking. \
\
### Teleology\
\
       %% out of order\
\
That nature is normative and some norms are natural is the best explanation of two phenomena: (1) human cognitive and and practical behaviors are inherently end-directed or teleological: John goes to the gym *in order to get fit for his film role*; Jane practices her speech *to win the Iowa primaries*; and (2) animals, plants, and all living things exhibit end-directed or teleonomic behavior: eyes see, hemlock trees offers shade to fish, stomachs digest, deer leap. The first of these phenomena is less controversial: pretty clearly, humans *act on reasons* and in pursuit of ends. The second is more controversial and more interesting -- is the appearance of teleology "just" teleonomy or teleology indeed? \
\
Call the view that there are no natural end-directed behaviors *teleological nihilism*.[@arnhart1988] 'Strong nihilism' can refer to the belief (of say determinists) that not even human practices are teleological. 'Weak nihilism' can refer to the belief that *only* human behaviors are end-directed, but nothing else. For example, Kant's explanation of natural purpose denies the biological theory that the form of an organism causes the parts to grow and relate to each other in a particular way, but he admits we *cannot help thinking so*.[@huneman2006naturalising]\
\
If the "nature is normative" thesis is true, both forms of teleological nihilism are false. \
\
### 2. What if ends are reducible? ###\
\
Teleoreductionism has taken one of two popular forms: the first reduces 'teleonomic' (that is, apparently teleological) biological functions to causal contributions to a system and the second reduces teleonomic biological functions to naturally selected effects. A proponent of the first reduction is Donald Davidson; a proponent of the second is Ruth Millikan. \
\
### Reducible reply ###\
\
Neither forms of 'teleoreduction' can account for the normativity of the biological function in question. If hearts simply cause %%\
\
James Barham elaborates:\
\
>I was aware of well-known criticisms of both of the then-current reductionist accounts of function: the "causal-role" theory and the Darwin-inspired "selected-effects" theory. In a nutshell, the problem is that neither theory can explain the normative character of biological processes in a coherent manner. (Biological processes are "normative" in the sense that they may either succeed or fail in fulfilling their functions.) With respect to the "causal-role" theory, there is no way to distinguish between functional and non-functional parts of a biological system without presupposing the normative character of the overall system as a whole -- which begs the question at issue.\
>With respect to the "selected-effects" theory, the problem is that selection history is conceptually irrelevant to the identification of function. True, it has a role to play in explaining how present-day functions have come to exist. But selection history cannot possibly explain what it is about a biological process that constitutes it as a function. This is a logical point that Darwinists simply miss. The reason is that our concept of function in no way depends on evolutionary history. If it did, then biologists like Aristotle, Galen, Harvey, and innumerable others who lived long before Darwin would not have had the means to identify the functions of organs, which they of course did. Sometimes, they got it wrong, as when Aristotle placed the seat of perception and thought in the heart, instead of the brain (though some of his predecessors got it right). But Aristotle's mistake was due to his inadequate knowledge of physiology, not to his ignorance of evolution.\
\
Millikan bites the bullet on this objection. She isn't trying to do "conceptual analysis" of the term 'function.' She is willing to admit that her concept of proper function only applies to functional objects with histories and that hypothetical counterexamples involving functional objects without histories prove that two objects with one and the same "*mark* of purposiveness" can have different functions.[\
\
### Biological Teleology\
\
Teleological realism in biology is making a come-back. There are those who protest teleological nihilism. Arnhart persuasively argues that teleology is assumed in medicine.[@arnhart1988] Zammito clarifies ongoing relevance in biology, since organisms seem to be intrinsically purposeful.[@zammito2006teleology]\
\
> In a series of important articles and books over the past decade or so, Bedau (1990, 1992a, 1992b, 1993), Cameron (2004), Christensen & Bickhard (2002), Jacobs (1986), Manning (1997), Maund (2000), McLaughlin (2001, 2009), Mossio et al. (2009), Mundale & Bechtel (1996), Nanay (2010), Nissen (1997), Perovic (2007), Walsh (2006), and Zammito (2006) have cast grave doubt on the coherence of any reductive analysis of function. Some of these authors (e.g., Jacobs, Maund, Zammito) call explicitly for a reconsideration of the possibility that teleological phenomena in biology might be both objectively real and irreducible. \
\
The very word 'teleology' is liable to sound quaint to modern ears. Barham clarifies the range of terms that denote identical or similar concepts: \
\
>"By \'93teleology,\'94 I have in mind such words and concepts as \'93purpose,\'94 \'93end,\'94 \'93goal,\'94 \'93function,\'94 \'93control,\'94 and \'93regulation,\'94 as well as the real- world biological phenomena to which these words and concepts refer. This means that the word \'93teleology\'94 should always be construed here in its internal or \'93immanent\'94 sense\'97purposiveness existing in living beings themselves\'97and never in its external or \'93transcendent\'94 sense of an overarching cosmic principle" (Barham 1). For a similar distinction, see Lennox (1992) and Brown (2001). \
\
We can add "purposive" and "goal-directed" to the constellation of concepts in the offing. \
\
My aim is to discuss a bit more about the details of the human telos. I shall assume that Aristotle and Annas are right that happiness is a good enough name for that thing or set of things, whatever it is/they are, that constitute our telos. So this is a discussion of happiness.\
\
\
## 3. Is there telos like happiness for humanity? Destiny and destination\
\
I would like to begin a discussion of happiness by distinguishing between two concepts: destiny and destination. \
\
Roughly, a destiny is an inevitable end. A destination is an *avoidable* end; it is a *chosen* end. Destiny does not contain within it (at least not necessarily) any intentionality. An asteroid many light years away from the moon (let's say) has a destiny of hitting the moon in 180,000 years. It's trajectory, and the coincidental perfect timing of the absence of any intervening objects, makes contact inevitable. \
\
A destination is different. When I told my mother I was moving to Kentucky *to get a PhD in philosophy* I was not describing my inevitable destiny, but describing my chosen destination. Many intervening factors could prevent me (car trouble, illness, etc.) -- and what's more, many factors could *dissuade me* (lack of jobs, money trouble, etc.). \
\
Happiness is our human destination. It is not, sadly, our human destiny. \
\
There is no one factor that seems to capture our destiny except biological death. The major candidates for a hoped-for destiny are not universal: Health, reproduction, and survival. Not all living things are healthy, not all successfully reproduce, and in the end none survive. \
\
But is there a universal human destination? If so, is it merely biological or something more -- perhaps neurophysiological, psychological, or spiritual?\
\
All living things *strive* for health, survival, reproduction and genetic propagation. But all living things, in the end, die. Individuals die when their metabolism stops, when if they have brains all brain functions stop, when they stop moving, and so on. Species "die" when they go extinct. \
\
Socrates is mortal. All men are mortal, and Socrates is man. But so are you and I "men" (the species, not the sex). So our destiny is biological death. \
\
What is our destination? Survival? The avoidance of death? Eternal life? Salvation? Evolution? Pleasure? "Permanent human happiness?"^[The Dalai Lama proposed this formulation.] Peace and nonviolence? Knowledge? The vision of God? Freedom from the wheel of reincarnation? Each of these guesses has something to commend it. \
\
1. The avoidance of death by medical science and/or evolution. This is the transhumanist project of Ray Kurzweil, Google's Calico, and Nick Bostrom. \
2. The avoidance of death by salvation from God as a free gift, or through faith or holiness or both. This is the Christian vision of \
3. The achievement of pleasure while life lasts. This is formalized despair. There is no happiness, therefore eat drink and be "happy" with scare quotes in bold. Our destiny is all we have, so we have no destination. Enjoy the journey until the journey dumps you into the trash compactor. \
4. The vision of God. This is the peculiarly Christian vision. \
5. Freedom from the wheel of reincarnation. \
\
One major distinction can be drawn between these various views along the question of how long human life lasts. Is human life (ideally) about 80 years, or more as medical science advances? Or is the human life countless millennia? This is a factual question that, of course, bears on the question of our telos. \
\
Is there any one conception of happiness that can coordinate these two views? If not, then no discussion of happiness can proceed before either proving or assuming an answer about the length of human life. \
\
Clearly, proving an answer to the satisfaction of all is a fool's errand. It is a  massive, contentious question. One can formulate it in terms of human personhood, the "immortality of the soul," and so on. Andrew Bailey's recent paper calls this the "persistence question": Do human animals have strictly biological persistence conditions?\
\
> Most contemporary animalists also say \'91yes\'92 to the persistence question. According to these animalists, a human animal lasts across an interval just in the case that its \'91purely animal functions \'96 metabolism, the capacity to breathe and circulate one\'92s blood, and the like \'96 continue' across that interval. We may, following Eric Olson, call this theory about the persistence of animals the \'91Biological Approach\'92.\
\
If so, what criteria would such a view have to satisfy? \
\
Given that human beings are rational animals that live either approximately 80 years or forever, what is our destination? The disjunction embedded in the question opens up a discouragingly wide range of possible answers. Nevertheless, let us try to answer it \
\
If there is any *one* thing that animals seek, it is determined by their nature. In my terms, their nature provides a "destiny". But our rational nature makes our way of life variable and hence pluralizes our destiny until death consolidates all those differences again. Hence if there is any *one* thing that rational animals seek, it is determined by the nature of rationality itself. Clearly, different people and cultures vary in believing and valuing particular objects. But variance is compatible with a single telos or single *plurality* of teloi. \
\
Variance is compatible with error. \
\
Is there anything rationality seeks by nature? Knowledge. What about practical rationality? Goodness. That is, knowing things *is what reason does*, and pursuing good things *is what practical reason does*; reason also avoid false things, and practical reason avoids evil. \
\
Happiness, the destination of every human being, is to know truth and to attain as much goodness as possible -- whether in the span of 80-90 years (barring illness, injury, and ) until biological death or for the rest of time. \
\
That this is our telos is possible to know even without knowing whether, in fact, our existence persists beyond biological death. \
\
According to Sartre, we must despair. According to Russel we must despair. According to these two, despair is the rational emotion, the emotion that makes most sense given the facts; the emotion that \'93fits\'94 reality. \
\
I think despair is a rational emotion if we are animals who amass goods for 80 years or so and then die, and if our species will eventually go extinct and all habitable planets in the cosmos will become uninhabitable. However, like Russel, the pursuit of knowledge is still worthwhile. It is our human \'93ideals of goodness and knowledge\'94 (I paraphrase Russel) that remain worthwhile pursuits even under the shadow of despair cast by that great reality of death. \
\
## 4. Stephen Brown\'92s Darwinian objection that \'93happiness\'94 of our species is gene propagation, which seems to transform ethics into a descriptive discipline; \
\
## 5. Ruth Millikan\'92s objection that an organism\'92s proper function cannot be read off its capacities but must be known via empirical history.\
\
### Other writers on natural teleology \
\
Kevin Kelly, wired editor, what technology wants. \
Robert Right nonzero.\
Christian de Duve\
Robert ousan bugaboosoistic s our telos ly ydHaezen\
\
> Natural teleology is unorthodox, but it has a long and honorable history. For example, in 1953 the evolutionary biologist Julian Huxley argued that it's in the nature of nature to get more advanced over time. "If we take a snapshot view, improvement eludes us," he wrote. "But as soon as we introduce time, we see trends of improvement."\
\
>More recently, Kevin Kelly, founding editor of Wired, made the case for teleology as clearly as could be in his book What Technology Wants: "Evolution ... has an inherent direction, shaped by the nature of matter and energy." That is, there may be laws of nature that push the universe toward the creation of life and mind. Not a supernatural god, but laws as basic and fundamental as those of thermodynamics. Robert Wright said much the same in Nonzero: The Logic of Human Destiny: "This book is a full-throated argument for destiny in the sense of direction." Those books prompted discussion among the literati but little backlash from evolutionary biologists. Ruse thinks that's because the authors are science writers, not scientists: "At a certain level, it's their job either to give the science or to put forward provocative hypotheses, and nobody takes it personally."\
\
\
\
>The paleontologist Simon Conway Morris, at the University of Cambridge, has argued that natural structures such as eyes, neurons, brains, and hands are so beneficial that they will get invented over and over again. They are, in effect, attractors in an abstract biological space that pull life in their direction. Contingency and catastrophe will delay them but cannot stop them. Conway Morris sees this as evidence that not only life but human life, and humanlike minds, will emerge naturally from the cosmos: "If we humans had not evolved, then something more or less identical would have emerged sooner or later."\
\
>Stuart Kauffman, of the Santa Fe Institute, who argues that the universe gives us "order for free." Kauffman has spent decades on origin-of-life research, aiming to show that the transition from chemistry to metabolism is as inevitable as a ball rolling down a slope. Molecules on the early earth, he suggests, inevitably began to catalyze themselves in self-sustaining reactions ("autocatalytic networks"), converting energy and raw materials into increasingly complex structures that eventually crossed the boundary between nonliving and living.\
\
>Other biologists are proposing laws that would explain evolutionary ascent in fundamental terms. Daniel McShea and Robert Brandon, a biologist and a philosopher of science, respectively, at Duke University, have argued for what they call a "zero-force evolutionary law," which posits that diversity and complexity will necessarily increase even without environmental change. The chemist Addy Pross, at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, in Israel, argues that life exhibits "dynamic kinetic stability," in which self-replicating systems become more stable through becoming more complex\'97and are therefore inherently driven to do so.\
\
>Still other scientists have asked how we could measure increases in complexity without being biased by our human-centric perspective. Robert Hazen, working with the Nobel Prize winner Jack Szostak, has proposed a metric he calls "functional information," which measures the number of functions and relationships an organism has relative to its environment. The Harvard astrophysicist Eric Chaisson has proposed measuring a quantity that he calls "energy-rate density": how much energy flows through one gram of a system per second. He argues that when he plots energy-rate density against the emergence of new species, the clear result is an overall increase in complexity over time.\
\
>But Nagel's goal was valid: to point out that fundamental questions of origins, evolution, and intelligence remain unanswered, and to question whether current ways of thinking are up to the task. A really good book on this subject would need to be both scientific and philosophical: scientific to show what is known, philosophical to show how to go beyond what is known. (A better term might be "metascientific," that is, talking about the science and about how to make new sciences.)\
\
>The pieces of this book are scattered about the landscape, in a thousand scraps of ideas from biologists, physicists, physicians, chemists, mathematicians, journalists, public intellectuals, and philosophers. But no book has yet emerged that is mighty enough to shove aside the current order, persuading scientists and nonscientists alike, sparking new experiments, changing syllabi, rejiggering budget priorities, spawning new departments, and changing human language and ways of thought forever. On the Origin of Species did it in 1859. We await the next Darwin.^[Michael Chorost is the author of Rebuilt: How Becoming Part Computer Made Me More Human (Houghton Mifflin, 2005) and World Wide Mind: The Coming Integration of Humanity, Machines, and the Internet (Free Press, 2011).]\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
\
#Virtue Conclusions\
\
## Summary\
\
**Chapter 5. Conclusion.** The fifth chapter concludes by summarizing the contours of the main argument and surfacing a few objections that might remain. I offer ethical arguments with self-consciously metaethical import; the normativity of virtue and practical wisdom need to be related to broader concerns with normativity in general, wherever it might be found (in language, meaning, even metaphysics). This chapter could also gesture at future research directions. For example, my future goals would be to negotiate this account with various requirements of naturalism, and to weigh in on the lively debate on this point.[@Brown2005really; @brown2008virtue chapter 1] Is a virtue ethics based on a normative conception of human nature ethically authoritative? Is such an ethics 'scientific'? Are the requirements of practical reason 'natural' requirements or 'second natural' or are they merely 'cultural'? Is naturalistic virtue ethics compatible with theism or is it necessarily atheistic? Is it compatible with atheism or is it necessarily theistic? What is nature? Is virtue naturalism? Why is Aristotle different from materialism and modern scientific Darwinian reductionism. \
\
\
### Introduction\
\
\'93The ancients were fools who thought rain fell from clouds, plants grew because of sunshine, pregnancy was caused by the transfer of seed in sexual intercourse, and that human beings need society in order to survive.\'94\
\
The sentiment of this statement is common. The speaker is, himself, a fool. The fact that a belief was endorsed by the ancients (or rejected by them) is irrelevant to the truth of the belief. There are many beliefs who enjoy a joint endorsement from ancients and 21st century technological, digital humanity. We ought not overstate the differences.\
\
What is different? The biggest differences seem to be in certain advances in technology, especially transportation, communication, and medicine. The ancients (indeed Galileo himself) could not fly in airplanes, transmit wireless signals to satellites, observe moon rock in a lab, or take an antibiotic to clear up a sinus infection. \
\
Are there any other, deep, weighty, existential differences in the worldview of the past and that of the present? There are none. Some are fond of suggesting that \'93we now know\'94 big truths that the ancients did not, like that demons do not cause mental illness. However, most such sage utterances are run-of-the-mill instances of circular reasoning. \
\
A useful test of rhetoric is the symmetry test: switch the content of the proposition to mean the opposite and see if the rhetorical force is fully preserved. For example, \'93Once upon a time, fools and charlatans used to believe there were only 7 planets. We now know that Pluto is a ninth planet.\'94 The smugness, the bravado, the grandiloquence, the accents of infallibility are identical, but the content is false. \
\
In order to assess the possibility of spiritual entities affecting physical conditions, in order to assess the possible existence of spiritual entities \'97 malevolent or otherwise \'97 we must examine the evidence. Those who have made up their minds and are therefore dismissive of the claims of their opponents may enjoy agreeing with the like-minded but merely asserting their joint position is useless in proving their position or refuting their opponent\'92s. \
\
### Conclusion of Final Chapter\
\
### Final sentence\
\
Much (if not all) ethical truth can be known and justified by reflection upon our nature as practical, rational animals. Thus we can see that virtue is excellence of humanity \'97 especially practical reason \'97 that partly constitutes human flourishing. }