{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### Abstract:\
\
Many textbooks divide philosophical ethics into Kantian, consequentialist, and virtue theories. Yet Kantians, consequentialists, and virtue theorists all write about virtue. The importance of a clear conception of virtue is unparalleled. Yet virtue must be coordinated with concepts of practical wisdom and happiness. In this dissertation, it is argued that virtues are those traits naturally exemplified by excellent human persons, the traits needed by all people to live well and realize their human potential. The virtue of practical wisdom is an especially important fulcrum, for it is the executive of moral virtues and the gateway to a range of intellectual virtues. Intellectual and moral growth is identifiably the telos of humanity, regardless of the important but contentious question of whether consciousness survives physical death. Furthermore, all these points can be defended from the standpoint of modern science and (some brands) of naturalism. Contemporary ethicists who are consequentialists tend to be naturalists though they disagree about cognitivism or non-cognitivism; Kantians tend to be non-naturalists. Virtue ethicists, by contrast, do not fit neatly into these taxonomical categories. The neo-Aristotelian virtue ethicists build an ethical theory on the facts about human nature, including the normative facts about how human reason can and ought to develop. Despite the difficulties, this ethical theory is a viable contender for acceptance across many philosophical schools of thought. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\fs24 \cf0 \
### To do list at the end of \
\
- Search for and clean up %'s\
- Replace "in a later chapter" with specific chapter references\
- Replace "above" with specific chapter references\
- Replace every other "his" and "he" and "he's" and "he'll" with a "hers" "she" "she's" "she'll" \
- Replace "generic" with another term, "Categorical" or some such, since "generic" refers to the linguistic form of the statement, not the conceptual proposition about natural kinds or categories. No, no, I like "generic" again.\
- Replace "shafer2007foundations" references to Mackie and McDowell with the original essays WITH PAGE NUMBERs\
- % Change name to Natural Normativity? chapter 2\
\
### Title\
\
What is the Title of the Dissertation? \
\
**The Point Virtue: Humanity, Reason, and Happiness**\
**Practical Reason in Recent Neo-Aristotelian Virtue Ethics**\
**Nature and Rationality: The Meta-Ethics of Virtue**\
**Nature and Rationality: The Meta-Ethics of Virtue in Foot, McDowell, and MacIntyre**\
**Virtue, Reason, Telos: A Defense of Neo-Aristotelian Ethical Naturalism**\
**The Point of Virtue: A Defense of Recent Neo-Aristotelians**\
**The Point of Virtue: Foundations of a Secular Virtue Ethics**\
**Foundations of Virtue Ethics**\
**Foundations of Virtue** }