{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
Rival Views motivated by naturalism
\b0 \
The main rival to metanormative realism of course is the belief that no moral or epistemic norms are real and binding on all rational agents. Why would anyone deny the appearances so firmly? The thinking is that naturalism demands it. \
\
The objection is that values are just too different from facts. I call this the "disharmony" objection or the "radical discontinuity" objection. The feeling is that, at bottom, all of reality must have a commonality and unity to it. All the various *realities* must connect up somehow. This feeling is, I believe, behind Darwin's search for a common ancestor for all the multitudinous life forms we see on the earth (not to mention in the fossil record). Why else would anyone, aware that there are billions of beatles, birds, whales, marmots, guanamos, gnats, elephants, and dogs even *think* of searching for one organism that -- however long ago -- is their universal parent?  \
 \
 Thomas Nagel has said that the apparent discontinuity between "objective" and "subjective" -- and exploring the two-- defines almost all his works. (Nagel thinks that the two perspectives are irreconciable. Our best bet is detached, disinterested awareness of both perspectives. When affirming one seems to make impossible affirming the other? Affirm the paradox.) Stephen Brown says that a "fundamental tenet of naturalism is that human beings are continuous with nature\'94
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 %Brown 2008, 4
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \
\
 On this objection, if values are different from facts, if moral facts are so different from nonmoral facts, then something must be wrong. \
 \
Their are a variety of available responses to the dissonance objection. One is to give up naturalism: \
\
* Moral facts are nonnatural but they're real, so get used to it. Reality just turns out to have two fundamentally different and in a sense irreconciable kinds of facts. This is G.E. Moore's and Shafer-Landau's choice.  \
*  Another is to give up moral realism. Nature is real; values are not natural (or they're just too different from the natural) so these putative values or moral facts have got to go. This is Mackie, Ayer, and Gibbard, Blackburn et. al., \
*  A third way is a spectrum of negotiations and compromises with naturalism that each attempt to keep as much moral realism as possible while doing as much justice as possible to our respect for science. This third way is what I am interested in. It's not that I do not see how one could give up moral realism, I just cannot do it. I find it psychologically impossible to live as if it *might* be OK for me to, rather than feed and clothe and educate my kids, to put them in a freezer.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Yes, this happened. Woman puts kids in freezer. http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2015/03/25/detroit-bodies-found-freezer/70419644/
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \
\
For instance, we could say that only nature is real and only what is natural can be known but argue that values and moral facts and so on are natural. \
\
Even among those who are persuaded by metanormative realism, there are several rivals. Each explains such norms as real in a different way. In order of decreasing similarity to my own conclusion, beginning with *most* similar, they are: \
}