{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### The Solution in General\
\
The solution to this problem can be approached via the question "how should one live?" The neo-Aristotelians, from Bernard Williams to Alasdair MacIntyre to more recent writers have almost universally fixed on this question as a crucial starting point for ethics. For example, John McDowell says that the whole "point of engaging in ethical reflection\'85 lies in the interest of the question 'How should one live?'"[@mcdowell1979virtue 331] \
\
The reason it is such a recurring theme in the neo-Aristotelian conversation is that no mature adult can avoid asking this question. And, I shall argue, we approach the practical answers to practical questions by practical reasoning. \
\
Recall Jay Wallace's general definition: "Practical reason is the general human capacity for resolving, through reflection, the question of what one is to do."[@seppracticalreason] My suggestion is that the capacity for resolving what to do is the source of "how?" questions and also the source of their answers. \
\
The answer to "how?" questions is an item of knowledge. For example, imagine that a child exercises practical reasoning when he asks: "How do I unscrew the light bulb?" The answer is an instruction ("twist left") or set of instructions, ("first, grip the light bulb; then twist left until it comes loose."). The instruction need not be put in the imperative mood: "twisting left unscrews a light bulb" is in the indicative mood (indeed, it is a generic proposition). The answer to a "how?" question is not just a proposition (that too) but an action, or rather an "actionable" proposition. The action and the abstract thought can be conceptually divided, but they are not divided *when we practically reason and live our lives*. \
\
Similarly, the answer to the "how should one live?" question will be a plan, an actionable proposition. And the person who is living how he or she should is actually executing the plan. The virtuous person, McDowell argues, knows what to do. Hence, virtue is a kind of practical knowledge. Virtue is a kind of knowledge, namely *practical knowledge* (a \'93disposition to act well\'94).  The answer to the question of how to live will be not just a proposition but a plan. The virtuous person does not simply *have a good plan* but enacts a good life plan. The answer to the "how should one live?" question is not just a "philosophy" but a *life*. \
\
So McDowell argues that the virtues are various "sensitivities" to the salient facts about how to live. \
}