{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
\
## Objections\
\
### Substantive Reasoning? \
\
Although I am employing a "substantive" or structural conception of practical reason, this is not the only view. The opposing view is a "procedural" or instrumental account of practical reason.^[For a discussion of this distinction, see: @hooker2004procedural.] The procedural or instrumental view sees practical reasoning as a value-neutral process of adjudicating the means to one's chosen ends, whatever those may be. I may criticize Smith for being "irrational" -- that is, for not using the necessary means to his or her own ends -- but I may not criticize Smith's ends. The substantive view makes some *ends themselves* "rational" or "irrational." Some philosophers object to the substantive conception as problematically building controversial ends into the definition of "reasonable". For an example, if I defined practical reasoning as the process by which one adjudicates the means to *one's own health*, then any sort of action that makes me unhealthy (e.g., eating some delicious but less-than-healthy food) would be ipso facto irrational. What is needed, the advocate of the procedural view points out, is a broader conception. \
\
Two responses are appropriate at this juncture: first, the argument so far is that practical reasoning as a procedure *must necessarily have a certain intelligible structure*. The advocate of the procedural view, no less than the advocate of the substantive view, needs a sufficiently general starting point for procedural reasoning to even get off the ground.  Frey's candidate for that starting point is the maximally general conception that "good is to be done and evil avoided", or that "one must pursue the human good." Secondly, I have not yet argued, in great detail, what the substantive good of practical reasoning is other than a conception of how to live given that one is a practical, rational primate. This substantive good is general enough to accommodate a variety of controversial views about what, in particular, one ought to do or not do. \
\
What further evidence can the neo-Aristotelian bring to indicate that practical reasoning is indeed better thought of as substantive? What reason is there to think that practical reasoning does not just aim at *proper means to any end*, nor does it merely aim at "ends" in the abstract but at *the apparent good*? Philippa Foot offers two considerations as further evidence. \
\
The first is that the substantive conception is needed to show how both prudential (self-regarding) and moral (other-regarding) reasons can be rational. Thus, Foot says: \
\
>This now seems to me to be the correct way of meeting the challenge that I myself issued in \'91Morality as a System of Hypothetical Imperatives\'92 and at that time despaired of meeting: namely, to show the rationality of acting, even against desire and self-interest, on a demand of morality. The argument depends on the change of direction that Quinn suggested: seeing goodness as setting a necessary condition of practical rationality and therefore as at least a part-determinant of the thing itself. Nor is this a quite unfamiliar way of arguing. Many of us are willing to reject a \'91present desire\'92 theory of reasons for action because we think that someone who knowingly puts his future health at risk for a trivial pleasure is behaving foolishly, and therefore not well. Seeing his will as defective, we therefore say that he is doing what he has reason not to do. Being unable to fit the supposed \'91reason\'92 into some preconceived present-desire-based theory of reasons for action, we do not query whether it really is a foolish way to behave, but rather hang on to the evaluation and shape our theory of reasons accordingly. And it is exactly a generalization of this presumption about the direction of the argument on which I am now insisting. For what, we may ask, is so special about prudence that it alone among the virtues should be reasonably thought to relate to practical rationality in such a way?[@foot2001natural 63]\
\
\
Foot is arguing here that goodness is a "necessary condition of practical rationality."  This insight is similar to Jennifer Frey's argument that "there could be no reasons unless a rational animal has a general conception of its own good." Rational action is action in pursuit of some end. And "some end" is something pursued as desirable or something to be avoided as undesirable. But pursuing something *as desirable or undesirable* is already a substantive evaluative judgment. Therefore, any rational action necessarily includes a substantive evaluative judgment \
\
If we accept this point, and I do not see how to avoid it, then we are already committed to a minimally substantive view of practical reason, rather than a merely procedural one. The alternative to aiming at the apparent good is not aiming at some value-neutral "end" or goal; the alternative to aiming at the apparent good is *not acting at all*. \
\
Given this basic and abstract formulation of the structure of practical reasoning, we can further specify good ends.  Just as the basic structure of reasoning begins with the apprehension of being in general and then on to particular beings, concepts, and categories, practical reason begins with the apprehension of good in general and then determines particular goods.  \
\
>Practical reason is the movement of thought towards, rather than away from, material particulars\'85. practical reasoning is a movement from general knowledge of what is good and how to live, towards the production of the kind of life that is essentially characterized by such knowledge. When it is done well, what is understood is the same as what is produced: human form or human life.[@frey 2]\
\
Such basic goods are apprehended as contributing to a distinctively human life form. \
\
>For practical reason, the starting points are the most primitive human goods that the will is naturally inclined to seek: life, knowledge, family, friendship, play, political community, and so on. These are the ends that all human beings want for their own sake, as intrinsically valuable to them. And they want these things in a rational way\'97viz., because they have a conceptual apprehension that they are constitutive of their general good.[@frey 88]\
\
Reasoning about ends may be a difficult and messy business. But we do it. It is an empirical fact that we reason -- indeed, disagree and debate -- about ultimate ends. Suppose Betty says to her friend, "I'm concerned about you. You haven't returned my calls. I heard you lost your job and your spouse is gone, and you're not eating. What's wrong?" It would be no consolation for her friend to respond, "Nothing's *wrong*. Yes, yes, all that is true: I'm destitute, alone, and unhealthy, but that is what I am *aiming* for." Betty would rightly wonder "what is wrong such that you have taken as your aims such unhealthy and ridiculous goals?"\
\
As we saw above, some charge that if reasoning about ends is not a mathematically-precise procedure, then it must not really be rational. Jay Wallace rebuts the charge in this way: \
\
>Practical deliberation about ends is not an easy or well-defined activity. There are no straightforward criteria for success in this kind of reflection, and it is often unclear when it has been brought to a satisfactory conclusion. These considerations encourage the Humean assumption\'97especially widespread in the social sciences\'97that there is no reasoning about final ends. On the other hand, how is one supposed to clarify one's largest and most important ends, if not by reasoning about them in some way? Rather than exclude such reflection because it does not conform to a narrowly scientific paradigm of reason, perhaps we should expand our conception of practical reason to make room for clarificatory reflection about the ends of action.[@seppracticalreason, section 6]\
\
Warren Quinn, likewise argues that we reason about goods: \
\
>Practical thought, like any other thought, requires a subject matter.  And for human beings the subject matter that distinguishes thought as practical is, in the first instance, human ends and action insofar as they are good or bad in themselves [\'85] practical thought deploys a master set of non-instrumental evaluative notions:  that of a good or bad human act, a good or bad human life, a good or bad human agent, and a good or bad human action.  Practical reason is, on this view, the faculty that applies these fundamental evaluative concepts.[@quinn1993morality 223]\
\
There are many different individual reasons for action. But the concept of a practical reason is the concept of a thing to be done. Practical reason runs into quandaries because there are so many reasons for action, and they sometimes conflict.  Some have to do with what is best for me, what is best for others, what is best for me and what is best for me later, what is permissible and what is required, etc. Although we may want to reserve the word 'moral' for other-regarding reasons, it is important to keep in mind that our goal of living well demands sensitivity to a whole range of reasons, regarding self, other, world, and so on. \
\
Although this process is messy, it is fundamentally so. Any attempt to configure the process by subjecting to a set of ready-made rules or criteria will make it easier to understand only at the cost of losing grasp of the process. Wiggins suggests that there are psychological, not philosophical, reasons behind the attempt to reduce the process of practical reasoning to something mathematical and formal: \
 \
>I entertain the unfriendly suspicion that those who feel they *must* seek more than  [the Aristotelian view of practical reason] provides want a scientific theory of rationality not so much for a passion for science, even where there can be no science, but because they hope and desire, by some conceptual alchemy, to turn such a theory into a regulative or normative discipline, or into a system of rules by which to spare themselves some of the agony of thinking and all the torment of feeling and understanding that is actually involved in reasoned deliberation.[@wiggins1975deliberation]\
\
Wiggins point, I think, is that practical reasoning is necessarily less precise than deductive reasoning. If indeed it cannot be made to be more clear, then to try to make it clear is futile. \
\
}