{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
\
## Conclusion\
\
This chapter has argued in more detail for a conception of practical reason as the set of capacities that defines human beings as practical reasoning animals. When practical reasoning is well-functioning, it constitutes part of the natural excellence of creatures like us. \
\
I first captured both the *practicality* and *rationality* of practical reasoning by defining it as the human capacity to resolve what to do and how to live by identifying practical reasons. I agreed with McDowell that the virtuous person is sensitive to practical reasons, i.e., the salient facts of what is required in a given situation. But I disagreed with McDowell that so resolving the "how should one live?" question is not just what morally virtuous people do, but what all mature, functional adults do because the whole range of practical reasons is broader than just "moral reasons" (narrowly construed). \
\
I gave a historical perspective on the notion of "moral" that shows how the older sense of the term included considerations beyond simply "other-regarding" reasons. Instead, 'practical reasoning' is an acceptable description of *any* evaluative reasoning that tells in favor of or against an action. I also argued that practical reasons are intrinsically capable of motivating. Nevertheless, there are many practical reasons calling for action, and they sometimes conflict. So success in identifying how to live and what to do requires a complex process of adjudicating between all the available goods known to one, sorting them, ranking them with care and wisdom, and forming them into a complete life plan. Success is defined as practical knowledge of what to do; failure is defined as practical error \'97 or perhaps ignorance \'97 of what to do. I argued that the procedural view of practical reasoning is itself committed to certain substantive normative judgments, such as that one ought to do whatever will bring about one's chosen ends; but more to the point, I argued that the substantive view of practical reasoning is more plausible: we reason about apparent goods and bads and act accordingly. \
\
This account of practical reason must do two kinds of work for my general argument. First, it must show the genuinely *moral* significance for virtue ethics of rational practice and practical reasoning. One cannot be "moral" without exercising fully the potential for practical reasoning. And secondly, it must show the genuinely *natural* position of reasoning withing naturalism. The mere capacity to reflect on our natural inclinations is a "natural power" of human nature. We are practical primates by definition. Or rather, since no infants have this capacity, we have the potential to become such with time. T\
\
he first principle of practical reason, that good is to be done and pursued while evil is to be avoided, is known by all functioning human adults. And some more particular practical reasons are obvious enough to be known by all or almost all. My account leaves room for the commonsense insight that our potential to become successful practical reasoners is greatly helped by education.  While there is much more to be said to fully defend this account against reasonable objections, I believe I have provided the outlines of a theory of practical rationality that can potentially do these two kinds of work. \
\
One important challenge is possible.  The Irrelevance Objection accepts (or entertains the hypothesis that) there are natural human norms, but argues that they are irrelevant to what we should do and how we should live because, as practical reasoners, we can pick and choose which natural norms to follow. Clearly, this objection arises from an emphasis on the importance of practical reasoning. \
\
}