{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 One familiar and influential way of framing the "how should one live?" question is this: There are two sorts of motives that drive everyone. They are *prudential* reasons and *moral* reasons. Prudential reasons incline one to look out for oneself while moral reasons compel one to look out for others. We are all naturally, selfishly inclined to pursue our own happiness or well-being. And yet we are all morally constrained to do our duty. \
\
This way of framing the "how to live" question invokes a pair of reasons: prudential and moral reasons. The familiar frame also sometimes associates one of the pair with emotion and the other with reason. Hume, for example, might associate morality with emotions and sentiments and associate prudence with rationality. It is "rational" for me to cheat you out of your cash, but my sentiments of guilt and brotherly affection don't let me. But prudence is not necessarily linked with rationality. Kant would flip the pair and associate morality with rationality and prudence with emotion and self-love. The prudential movements arise from emotional, non-rational aspects of our psychology. Hursthouse explains this aspect of Kant's moral theory: \
\
>And there is indeed much in Kant to suggest that, although he shares with Aristotle the view that we have not just one, but two principles of movement, in other respects his philosophical psychology is Humean. He seems committed to the view that our emotions or inclinations are no part of our rationality. They come from the non-rational, animal side of our nature; if they happen to prompt us to act in accordance with the judgements of reason about what ought to be done we are lucky; if they incline us against them we find life difficult, but their prompting us in the right direction is no mark or indication of their rationality. The emotions are not rational in any way.[@hursthouse1998virtue 109]\
\
Kant is commonly cited in this familiar framing of the issue. Kant (or a common caricature of Kant) presents morality as a single, universal moral law obligates one to do what is right, whether or not it is prudential.  Our duty is sometimes in accord with our inclinations but often against them. Morality lives and dies at the intersection of two competing kinds of reasons. The immoral person is the one who gives into prudential reasons while the moral person is the one who elevates moral reasons. \
\
\
But, on this view, when life does not present a moral dilemma, when the two kinds of reasons do not compete, morality is idle. One is free to live one's life in response to prudential considerations which are neither (morally) good nor (morally) bad.  One *must* do one's duty, but beyond that, one may live in any number of ways that accord with one's inclinations: get a good job, save for retirement, eat healthy foods, exercise, make friends, and so on. Just do not break the moral law. \
}