{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab720
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\fi360\sl360\slmult1

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
What is the underlying concern or commonality among naturalists from Lucretius to Dewey to Quine and McDowell? Provisionally, I take the underlying spirit of naturalism be what I call the continuity criterion.  This criterion says that all the sciences are unified in a harmonious set of methods and practices and aims, and that nature is a unified manifold of substances and properties. The continuity criterion (which assumes scientific realism as opposed to, say, transcendental idealism) aims to match all of our knowledge to all of reality. It is exclusive and inclusive. It excludes pseudoscience, superstition, mythology, or pessimism over insoluble \'93mysteries\'94 but seeks to account for all of the continuous manifold of existence into a unified body of knowledge, a single science or harmonious set of sciences, like the many leaves of Sybil\'92s book.  \
So, for instance, physicalism meets the continuity criterion. This continuity criterion can be satisfied by physicalism by eliminating everything that does not immediately appear on a list of physical objects or phenomena: not only gods and souls, but abstract objects, properties. \
The continuity criterion can be satisfied via pragmatism, or via the emergence of the non-physical from the physical and its supervenience. For this reason also evolutionary naturalists or emergent naturalists ground all the special features of humans in the organizational complexity of our biology: Chemicals and elements, at a level of complexity and organization, become living matter. Brains, at an appropriate level of complexity and organization or structure, become conscious matter \'97 still more complex and organized, self-conscious matter. And at that moment, nature has an "inside." }