{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## Foot \
\
### Summary of *Natural Goodness*\
\
Philippa Foot\'92s original theorizing has earned her many admirers and critics. Rosalind Hursthouse is a follower. From Wittgenstein\'92s highly idiosyncratic and penetrating chains of reasoning, Elizabeth Anscombe and Foot took inspiration to form their own style of writing and theorizing. \
\
Foot\'92s ethical naturalism is one of two or three kinds of virtue theories that are avowedly naturalistic. What exactly qualifies each as \'91naturalistic\'92 will of course be a subject of some dispute in the discussion that follows. But each of these virtue theorists lays claim to the title or banner of naturalism. So we will consider each in turn. \
\
Foot\'92s theory as expressed in Natural Goodness I take to be the following theses:\
1. The semantic meaning of evaluative terms like \'91good\'92 follows the same semantic structure as other terms \'97 this is the \'91conceptual pattern of natural normativity\'92. \
2. Norms govern each living biological organism according to its natural excellence and defect. \
3. Humans are living biological organisms.\
4. Norms govern humans according to its natural excellence and defect.\
5. Among the norms uniquely governing humans are norms of practical rationality. \
6. \
\
After explaining how natural normativity applies to humans, Foot addresses the objection related to what I have called the anomaly or "just too different" objection, that humans are saliently distinct in kind from plants and animals in that humans are rational. She does think that our rationality is sui generis among the animal kingdom. Other animals act but we *act on reasons*. We choose on rational principles (Aquinas) or act on *logos* (Aristotle). Animals, by contrast, and small children, *incline* this way rather than that. They may pursue ends but they do not pursue *ends qua ends*. A sheep sees green grass but does not *see that* the grass is green and that green food is most often healthful. Animals participate in choice as they participate in knowledge. Crows can be said to know that X will lead to Y [@crows 1][@crows2] but they do not know X *as a means* to Y. The distinction may seem arbitrary but Foot thinks (and I agree) it is important. Seeing something *qua end* is not a special mode of perception over and above visual perception nor is it something we can discern through "Lockean introspection" [@foot2003n 55]. Rather, following Wittgenstein, it has something to do with language. Humans use language to justify and explain choices. Children come to use language in this way. As she says, "When we say that human beings are able to choose *on a rational ground* as no animal can, it is because human action belongs in such surroundings, and so, ultimately, because humans use language not matched by anything in animal life." [@foot2003n 55] A formula she provides that I find helpful is this: animals pursue the *good they see* while humans pursue *what they see as good.* An animal may display hesitation when "torn between hunger and fear" or like Buridan's ass torn between two desires, but there is no behavior in the animal whose explanation demands we posit rational deliberation. \
\
\
This objection is closely related to another objection (presumably from a moral skeptic or immoralist) that perhaps we have no reason to do what good human beings must do. This objection concedes that 'action A is necessary for being a good human' but asks "What if I do not care about being a good human being?" [@foot2003n 52] She borrows a question from Gary Watson who wonders whether any morally realist theory can show that being a gangster is incompatible with being a good human being" [@foot2003n 53]. She wants to show that it is. \
\
###Foot and Nagel's Rationalism\
Foot's rationalism sounds a lot like Nagel's. For Nagel, we simply see some states of affairs *as* grounds for doing this and not that; we see some states of affairs as justifying acting rightly or forbidding wrongly. My child crying with hunger I see as grounds for feeding her. My son playing too roughly with my daughter I see as grounds for removing him from the room, even though his tears of protest match or equal her tears of pain. My memory that I promised to read a student's paper before Friday strikes me as grounds for staying up a little later to read it, despite feeling ready for bed. Foot says we "shouldn't be allowed to get away with a claim to 'just see' that a reason exists" [@foot2003n 58] There are different kinds of "shoulds." One "should" go to the bank to prevent an overdraft and one "should" stay home recovering from the flu.  These shoulds are relative to the circumstances. There is also a should "all things considered." This second kind of should we can say is not relative to the circumstances, or we can equally say it is relative to the fixed set of all the circumstances. In one context, the fact that a man is my father may be reason to take care of him in old age; but in another context it is not reason giving. \
\
If we have considered context and all extenuation circumstances, it is possible that certain facts are reason giving full stop. If we have considered all things, we can utter an "overriding or final 'should'". For instance, suppose I'm leaning toward grading the student's paper. I think, *well, I promised to do it, and though I am sleepy, there are no extenuating circumstances that make it unwise for me to lose a little sleep. I can sleep in, or catch a nap, tomorrow, and no one's life depends on my being especially alert, and I'm not out of coffee grounds, etc.* All things considered, I ought to go ahead and grade the student's paper. \
\
Foot thinks that to not do what I *should do all things considered* is irrational. \
\
She doesn't think that morality is just a system of hypothetical imperatives, though she argued it an in earlier essay.[@foot1972morality] The truth behind her error was that desires and interests are always intimately related with our actions and motivations. That is, desires *may* be reason giving. "A desire to see the Taj Mahal can in the right circumstances make it rational to plan a trip to India and visit a travel agent; and similarly the knowledge that cigarettes are carcinogenic can rationalize giving up smoking by showing that it is in one's interest to do so." [@foot2007n 61] But they are not *always and necessarily* the only reason giving reasons for action. \
\
And this is the mistake with which she is less patient:  the dogmatic belief that desires simply must always necessarily be the "real" reasons behind action. She bluntly asserts a plurality of fundamental motives and challenges the philosophical dogma to defend itself against those ostensive facts. She presents "all sorts of causes" that might explain an action: habits, imitation, nostalgia, ritualistic symbolism, and conscience. \
\
>What tells us that conscience cannot explain action? Someone may give as the explanation of his action a thought about right and wrong, and it may be a true explanation, as Kropotkin clearly supposed in his story of Maklay's decision not to photograph his sleeping servant. So offhand we have no reason to suppose that acting as conscience demands has to be brought into a special mould, as of a belief and a \'91conative state\'92, before we can see it as a genuine explanation of what someone does. If we like, we can say that someone whose action is explained in this way is \'91wanting to do what is right\'92; but now we are simply expressing the agent's intention in terms of wanting, not showing the explanation as fitting a favoured mould.[@foot2007n 61-62] \
\
I find this reasoning persuasive. \
\
Foot details an article from Warren Quinn to the effect that the concept of rationality includes an evaluative aspect, namely that it aims at the good. \
\
This fits with what we have sketched in our normatively realist virtue ethical framework. Practical reason just *is* that faculty that aims at the good. \
	\
Foot summarizes: \
>Earlier in the book, in Chapters 1\'963, I gave reasons for believing propositions about natural goodness and badness in various plants, animals, and human beings; for instance, for believing that an individual oak tree with superficial, spindly roots was to be evaluated as defective, and, passing to human beings, gave reasons of the same form for the assertion that Maklay would have acted badly had he photographed his sleeping servant.\
\
What must a good person do? A person acting rationally is acting well and acting well is acting rationally. To ask for a *reason* why one should act *rationally*, that is, *on reasons at all* is in some way to be confused or absurd. Jack asks for a reason why he should act on reasons because he is confused: he thinks at the moment that 'desire' is a reason for acting because it has motivational force "built in", and that any other 'reasons' for acting must be just abstract propositions with no motivational force. Jill asks for a reason to act on reasons because she is absurd: she sincerely affirms at the same time in the same respect that one ought to phi and one ought to not-phi. Jill we cannot help with arguments, but (perhaps) with therapy. Jack we cannot help with arguments, at least, not traditional arguments. He probably needs a good deal of Socratic questioning to allow him to think through what he really thinks. \
\
\
That the phenomenon happens I do not contest, though some may. But I wonder why. \
\
##Practical Reason\
\
### Responses\
\
\'93But the belief that the word \'91good\'92 must mean something different in the former and the latter is, I think, simply a prejudice coming from the type of ethical theory that has dominated analytic philosophy in the past half\uc0\u8208 century\'94 (Foot, Natural Goodness 39).[@foot2003n 39]\
\
Foot here confuses one error with another. Certainly the belief that the word 'good' is special is _part_ of the prejudice of many 20th century analytic philosophers. That may be an error. But is it "simply" that prejudice? I think not. The other error in the vicinity is the belief that reality is bifurcated at its root into the normative and non-normative, or the ethical and everything else. Normative facts, on this error are just very different from all other facts. On the one hand, modal facts seem to be more akin to normative facts than other facts, since propositions describing modal facts describe states of affairs that nowhere obtain at the moment and may never obtain. "If heated up that rock must melt." And "Necessarily, each member of the human species will one day suffer biological death." The truth of these propositions, it may be argued, depends on our empirical observation. We, or rather some scientist, has observed of this or that rock at such-and-such a temperature, and we (most all of us) have observed human beings (in pictures or in life)die of old age, sickness, injury, violence, or accidents. But have we ever *observed* the modal fact that all humans *must* die? No, we infer it as a kind of nomological principle D, abstracted from a list of examples of human death. If I listed as a-z the (relatively few) deaths we have actually observed it would be a. This fellow died; b. My grandmother died, etc. Then add them to the (perhaps thousands) of deaths I have heard about from sources I trust. We still only have a sample of a few thousand. That tiny ratio (thousands of billions of currently living humans) of a sample is supposed to justify a principle D that ranges over all possible human beings, past, present, and into the unlimited future, and even fictional characters. My point is not to challenge the inference; it seems as true and well-founded as an inductive inference can be. My point is that the proposition with a modal operator D is different from the propositions a-z without.  And D seems to me appropriately described as a *fact*. \
\
Even so, if you find moral facts bizarre, then modal facts and other normative facts are liable to seem equally bizarre, or similarly bizarre for the identical reasons. They are just too different from other facts. \
\
Another error is the thought that properly basic beliefs are not justified unless we can justify them by non-basic methods, as when some physicists deny the solidity of a brick because they know it's "not really" solid. But our account of subvenient things like atoms and molecules can and should explain our knowledge of supervenient things like solidity.  \
\
The bottom line for Foot's naturalism is that it is true but not complete. To go part of the way is not the same as to go the wrong way, but it is still not sufficient. "For to say that [human operations  ""could be evaluated in the same way as...plants"] is possible is to imply that some at least of our judgements of goodness and badness in human beings are given truth or falsity by the conditions of human life."[@foot2003n 38] And this implication is correct, she defends. Natural normativity governs plants and animals and humans in the same way. All have function and all can achieve or fail to achieve that function. A pattern of life is indexed to each species; its good is specified and the defects by contrast to those qualities conducive to its good.\
\
Each member of the species lives out a particular life in a context or environment. Even if it has species-specific "virtues" it may fail to survive or reproduce. She mentions that a swift deer as well as slow can run into the hunter's trap. \
\
Is the human good reproduction? Stephen Brown all but says yes. But the objection is that people who willfully avoid reproduction to not seem to us to be ipso facto defective. Sterile couples who wish to procreate but cannot rightly lament, for reproductive difficulties are tragic. But bachelors, celibates, homosexuals, who might but do not wish to procreate might seem to us not only normal but even exemplary in their self-control and devotion to their mission or calling. All this Foot can accommodate. She says "the teleological story goes beyond a reference to survival itself." [@foot2003v, @foot2003n ]\
\
I hesitate to play the ultimatum game and say that this is a sine qua non of human rationality. But I cannot understand those who look at all of human life, our forms of life, our elaborate way of hunting, cooking, eating, and storing our food, our elaborate way of building structures for ourselves, our scientific journals, our space program, our international trades and laws, our arts, music, poetry, dance, and theater, and all the helter-skelter that makes human civilization buzz -- I cannot understand, I say, someone who can keep all this in view and countenance the thought that "all this is just so we can survive." \
\
The reason I find it so obvious that all of human activity is for *happiness* and not merely survival is that survival is a necessary but not sufficient condition for all or most of our intentional actions. \
\
Some things have no survival value but give value to survival. We survive *for the sake*  of thriving, we don't thrive for the sake of surviving. \
\
The thought that "well, despite appearances, survival is the telos of all living things" if true, would guarantee that "all intentional human activity is for the sake of survival". But surely if the evidence suggests that we deny the consequent, then rationality demands a denial of the antecedent. If the antecedent is above rational scrutiny, if it is nonfalsifiable, then what we have is not a rational conclusion but an irrational dogma. \
\
One whose dogmatic belief in Darwinian explanations does not allow them to see the plain facts cannot claim to be more rational. They must cling to their mantra, and trust in the magical ability of propositions from neo-Darwinian theory like "survival is the only goal of biology" to help theory triumph over common sense. One small slip up and they could see the truth. \
\
\
\
\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\
\
\
}