{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Oath-breakers are despicable. Promise-keepers are admirable. We take these truths to be self-evident. \
Promise-making is something only (as far as we know) humans can do. Promises are artifacts of language, and the kind of language apparently only we have. Promise-making is distinctively human; so promise-breaking is distinctively human. As one professor whom I had for a biology class at the Cypress Community College put it, \'93Humans are worse than ants, for ants cooperate; worse than penguins, for penguins raise their own; worse than black widows, for black widows only kill one at a time.\'94 It is true that humans are (potentially) worse than the worst chimp or dolphin or vermin. But likewise humans are (potentially) better than the best chimp or dolphin or elephant. Promise-keeping is a virtue (as far as we know) only we can do. \
Speaking about \'93virtues\'94 is liable to invite the objection: 
\i which virtues? Whose justice? 
\i0 I propose to keep the virtue of promise-keeping firmly in view. Drawing up a list of virtues is difficult. For, if virtues exist, is there a finite list? Secondly, those of various traditions or worldview are liable to object to one or another virtue on rival lists. Is magnanimity still a virtue, as Aristotle taught? Is humility a vice, as Nietzsche taught? \
But one cannot write about \'93virtue\'94 in general without examples in view. I will be restricting myself to three sets. The first set has only one member: promise-keeping. The habit of keeping promises, the quality of reliably making and following through with what one says, fulfilling business contracts, showing up at the time and date you said you would for personal appointments. \
The second set is the classical Greek set of virtues: justice, courage, moderation, and practical wisdom. Diakosyne, andrea, sophresune, and phronesis. I have heard arguments that injustice is \'93better\'94 for a person than justice (think Thrasymachus). I have never heard anyone seriously defend immoderation as a virtue: a cursory search through JSTOR, Philosopher\'92s Index, and Google Scholar reveals no results for the phrase \'93a defense of drunkenness.\'94 Alcoholism may be a sickness or a vice or both, but it is not a virtue. Similarly, practical foolishness is never praised, even by Erasmus. A fool without power is a clown \'97 either an annoyance or welcome comic relief. A fool with power is a villain, dangerous, and rightly feared. No one wants Dumb and Dumber flying the 747.}