{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ---\
author:     Keith Buhler\
title:      Paper 1\
class:      Metaethics \
teacher: Anita Superson\
semester: Fall 2015\
\
---\
\
**Against Subjectivity of Values**\
\
## Introduction\
John Mackie\'92s classic essay is famous for arguing that \'93there are no objective values\'94 (13).[All page citations in this paper refer to Mackie's essay "The Subjectivity of Values" in Shafer-Landau and Cuneo (eds). *Foundations of Ethics: An Anthology.* Blackwell, 2007. The original essay is a chapter from @mackie.] He accepts the heavy burden of proof a subjectivist has to bear to overturn the \'93defeasible presumption\'94[@nagel2012mind] argued in the \'93main tradition of European moral philosophy\'94 and assumed in our moral language that (some) moral values are objective entities in the \'93fabric of the world\'94, that such values are categorically motivating regardless of the agent\'92s desires and beliefs, and that being a moral person in part is constituted by the recognition and proper response to such values. \
\
His two arguments (from \'93relativity\'94 and from \'93queerness\'94) aim to bear that burden of proof and to establish that right and wrong (etc.) are not real but falsely \'93objectified\'94 into world by our thought and language. In this response paper, I summarize Mackie\'92s arguments and critically analyze them. 	\
In a first brief pass I restate his major theses and premises; in a second more detailed pass I discuss Mackie\'92s objections to his own points, his rebuttals to those objections, and my additional objections. \
\
I\'92m afraid I shall not have much favorable to say of Mackie\'92s arguments. My conclusion, in brief, is that some values do indeed seem objective, and that the burden of proof on those who would deny the appearances would require much more substantial arguments than Mackie\'92s. The acceptance of some moral values as objective seems to me a safer philosophical bet than almost any other, and his discussion, though justly famous for its expression and pithiness, is too erroneous to come close to justifying their rejection.  \
\
## Preliminary Summary\
\
### Thesis and Key Terms\
\
The primary thesis of Mackie's essay is that \'93there are no objective values\'94 (13). Values like goodness, rightness, wrongness, and also beauty or ugliness are \'93not part of the fabric of the world\'94 (13). This claim has two parts. The ontological part is that such values do not exist. The epistemological part is that, even if they did, our epistemic access to them would require the existence of a *sui generis* mysterious faculty of moral perception. Since no such faculty exists, we are justified in rejection the existence of objective values. \
\
He calls this conclusion \'93moral skepticism\'94 and "subjectivism" but distinguishes his position from other positions that have been similarly labeled.[^2]By arguing that there are no objective values, Mackie is arguing that there is no "categorically imperative element\'94 to moral oughts (15). There are no entities in the world such that I ought to do X or not do Y regardless of my desires, contingent wants and needs. \
\
Mackie clarifies that all the psychological activities of wanting, preferring, valuing, praising, blaming and so on are *subjective* in the sense that *subjects* perform them, but that to concede this is not does not entail that there are no objective values. Rather, even though *subjects* want, prefer, value, praise, and blame, it has been thought that subjects attempt to do so *in appropriate response to* objective values. Objective values so to speak obligate* certain responses (such as respect for elders, and hatred of evil) and categorically provide reason for certain actions (such as doing your duty or avoiding cruelty). It has been the \'93main tradition of European moral philosophy includes [the claim] that there are objective values of just the sort I have denied\'94 (15).[^1]  These values are assumed or argued to exist as part of the \'93fabric of the world\'94 and to be knowable. \
\
Surprisingly, Mackie sets himself to subvert not only the \'93main tradition\'94 of moral philosophy but to subvert that which has \'93a firm basis in ordinary thought, and even in the meanings of moral terms\'94 (16). He admits that ordinary moral judgments and ordinary moral emotions (we might simply call them *ordinary emotions*) are only intelligible on the assumption that objective moral values exist. Confirmation comes from the admitted psychological cost of the denial of objective values, which is \'93an extreme emotional reaction, a feeling that nothing matters at all, that life has lost its purpose\'94 (17). And confirmation seems to come from the cost of denying that our moral terms refer, which is the need to provide a comprehensive non-cognitivist or non-descriptivist theory of the pragmatics of moral talk (16). Mackie thinks the cost of these subversions, though high, ought to be paid. \
\
### Three Arguments \
\
The moral skepticism thesis that there are no objective values he supports with three main considerations: The first is that the absence of moral values is the best explanation of \'93moral relativity\'94 (or moral disagreement); the second is that objective values, if they existed, would be objectionable queer. (By queer, of course, he means, weird, unique, unprecedented, unusual, sui generis, strange, baffling, mysterious, opaque, and so on.) The third consideration is different. It aims *assumes* that the first two arguments are sound and proceeds to show that the persistence of our belief in objective values can be explained as an instance of objectification \'97 that is, the reification and externalization of our moral attitudes, beliefs, preferences, wishes, and so on. Let\'92s consider each of these in a bit more detail before critically analyzing them. \
\
The first positive argument for Mackie\'92s thesis is the argument from relativity (which I shall call the argument from disagreement). The argument from relativity or disagreement is this: moral codes vary between societies at a time and within a society across time. One society endorses polygamy, another condemns it; one society endorses human sacrifice, another condemns it; one endorses revenge killing, another condemns it. An explanation of the wide variation and instability of these endorsements and condemnations, as well as the accompanying attitudes of approval, disgust, honor, is that there are no objective values at work. The moral code of a society is not a map of what is \'93really\'94 morally lawful, but a map of that societies attitudes, endorsements, and condemnations. I will summarize Mackie\'92s own discussion of the argument from relativity below. \
\
The second positive argument is the argument from queerness. The argument from queerness builds on the sense that \'93if there were objective values, then they would be entities or qualities or relations of a very strange sort, utterly different from anything else in the universe\'94 (19). Objective values would be esoterica, akin to non-natural qualities, Plato\'92s transcendent Form of Good. They would be (like divine commands from heaven)  authoritatively prescriptive yet empirically unverifiable. (Mackie is as poetic as possible in making the descriptive seem mundane and the prescriptive seem mystical.) What\'92s more, their power of categorical commendation, of obligating us to act in certain ways irrespective of our desires, is utterly unique. The reasoning seems to be that we assume the world is a unified whole, and we know a lot about spatio-temporal, physical entities, include evolved animals like ourselves who are language-users, concept-users, and evaluators. We know that we are motivated by our desires, preferences, by the pursuit of pleasure and avoidance of pain. So it seems more reasonable "To ask no more of the world than we already know is there\'97the ordinary features of things on the basis of which we make decisions about them, like or dislike them, fear them and avoid them, desire them and seek them out. It asks no more than this: a natural world, and patterns of reaction to it."[@blackburn1984] It does not seem necessary to posit abstract, non-physical entities that have no intrinsic relation to our other psychological states such as our desires and approvals. \
\
The third argument depends for its force on the success of the other two. *If* and only if values are subjective, then the question \'93Why do we tend to objectify values?\'94 is an interesting question. If values are not subjective, of course, then this question is fallacious, for it presupposes the conclusion it is supposed to support (which is a *petitio principi*) and assumes that identifying the *origin* of a belief can disprove the belief (which is a genetic fallacy). \
\
## Critical Discussion\
\
With these overview summaries in hand, we can critically discuss these points. I shall summarize in more detail Mackie\'92s discussion of objections to his two main arguments, his own rebuttals of those objections, and I shall offer my own critical discussion. \
\
### Distorted Moral Perception reply to Moral Disagreement Argument\
\
Mackie provides one reply to the argument from relativity or disagreement: Perhaps there is another explanation, that varying moral codes \'93express perceptions, most of them seriously inadequate and badly distorted, of objective values\'94 (18). (Call this the *Distorted Moral Perception* reply.)People and societies vary on evaluative matters in the same way and for the same reason that people and societies vary on scientific, historical, legal, and other matters. Perhaps she disagreements between people and societies \'97 the varieties of moral codes \'97 is similar to scientific or historical disagreements. Scientific disagreements arise between people offering different \'93speculative inferences or explanatory hypotheses based on inadequate evidence\'94 (18). I think Mackie is suggesting that two people might dispute a particular point (is Pluto a planet? Is this the tooth of a dinosaur or platypus?) because neither of them has fully accurate knowledge and both are doing the best they can with the available evidence, though future evidence may be forthcoming. \
\
But the Distorted Moral Perception reply is, Mackie thinks, false. He denies that objective values are the kinds of entities about which more evidence may be forthcoming. The analogy to scientific or historical disagreements, then, does not hold. \
\
Mackie is seriously misguided here. The argument from disagreement has been so often deployed and so widely misunderstood it is hard to know where to start.[@enoch2009moral] The argument from disagreement can be simplified as the conditional syllogism that if values were objective, there would be little or no widespread, profound disagreement on moral values. There is widespread, profound disagreement. So values are not objective.  There are two possible challenges, and I think both are justified.[@sepmoralantirealism] The first is to deny that disagreement is so widespread as to be a massive problem for moral realism. The second is to deny that (even if there *were*) widespread variation in moral codes between people and societies, that we should take that as reason to be skeptical about moral values; it is rather good reason to think values are indeed objective. \
\
Let's take each of these challenges in turn. Moral disagreement is not good reason to be skeptical about the objectivity moral values because such disagreement is saliently identical to scientific and philosophical disagreement; and scientific and philosophical disagreements are not good reason to be skeptical about scientific realism or optimistic engagement in philosophical dialectic. Some scientific disputes will probably never be resolved with reference to new empirical data: what happened seconds before the Big Bang? What is the necessary and sufficient condition for a discipline to be considered a science? And certainly some philosophical disputes certainly will never be resolved by adequate empirical evidence: Is idealism or empiricism or rationalism true, or something else? The persistence of idealists, rationalists, empiricists etc., for the last 2000 years (at least) shows that such disputes are ongoing and not likely to be resolved. If that idealogical disagreement is evidence that there is no fact of the matter \'97 no objective truth \'97 then perhaps Mackie can use moral disagreement as evidence that there is no objective value. But if he thinks, say, idealism is false and empiricism true, despite the existence of people and schools of thought who mistakenly hold that idealism is true, then he ought to think also that (say) those who hold Moral Code A are getting the objective values accurately, while those who hold Moral Code B are mistaken. \
\
As for denying that moral disagreement is as widespread as often assumed, Mackie himself offers an objection to the argument from relativity: perhaps some very broad moral principles *are* universally recognized. For example, isn't it universally recognized that (say) it is good to promote the general happiness? Perhaps these broad moral principles are agreed upon in a way that renders moral disagreement less puzzling and the existence of objective values more plausible. Call this the Moral Agreement reply. \
\
I think the Moral Agreement reply is a serious problem for the would-be opponent of objective value. But Mackie\'92s reasons for rejecting it are puzzling. First, he complains that arguing that broad, elevated moral principles are objective entails that specific, practical moral principles are contingent. He says, \'93if things had been otherwise, quite different sorts of actions would have been right\'94 (19). What is the substance of this reply? It is eminently true that \'93if things had been otherwise, quite different sorts of actions would have been right\'94 \'97 if for instance humans could breath underwater, then waterboarding would not be wrong because it would not be torturous and therefore cruel. If Bob\'92s society was communist then amassing capital for his own personal use would be selfish and illegal and therefore antisocial. These counterfactuals are just what we would predict if general moral principles reflected universal, objective values. \
\
Second, Mackie suggests that most people\'92s moral lives and moral judgments do not actually operate according to specification of \'93general principles.\'94 Rather, people seem to make moral judgments and live their moral lives according to certain \'93immediate responses\'94 and \'93basic moral judgments\'94. \
\
Thankfully, Mackie does not spend too much time elaborating on this paper thin reply and moves on to the argument from queerness. We can reflect on our own moral judgments for a moment to explore what it might mean that we often make moral judgments as immediate aroused responses. For example, perhaps we hear a news story about a woman beating, scalding, suffocating, and finally murdering her children before storing their corpses in a freezer.[^3] That immediately strikes me as cruel, sick, degraded, disgusting, and wrong. It \'93arouses\'94 disgust in me immediately. Whether this response is the logical extension of a moral principle I reflectively endorse (such as \'93parents should care for their children\'94 or \'93cruelty is wrong\'94) or merely a pre-reflectively, visceral attitude is irrelevant to whether the moral judgment accurately reflects the objective value of parental love. \
\
So I think Mackie's reply inadequate, and the Moral Agreement reply stands. \
\
\
###  The Problem of Moral Agreement\
\
\
We can make it stronger.  My own challenge to the argument from relativity is to focus more closely on general and specific moral codes that appear well-nigh universal. For instance, the universal prohibition on incestuous relationships, the blame of immoderation (drunkenness or alcoholism are condemned in every society in the world), the praise of justice and compassion, specifically caring for the poor, widows, and orphans.[@abolition Appendix I: Illustrations of the Tao. Lewis, a literary scholar, compiles a list of agreeing moral codes from a variety of ancient, medieval, and modern codes.] These are transcultural and span all known historical periods. They are \'93general\'94 principles and also rather specific. The best explanation for their widespread agreement is that they are expressions of objective value.\
\
Add to the Moral Agreement reply the Distorted Moral Perception reply, and the case is even stronger. Even though there is some variation on such moral principles, we can plausibly explain *at least some* moral disagreement by reference to distorted perception or inadequate moral education. This is not saliently different than when we plausibly explain *at least some* scientific disputes by reference to researcher bias, inadequate scientific or logical thinking, etc. \
\
###  Objective Values are Strange\
\
The famed argument from queerness Mackie calls \'93even more important\'85 and certainly more generally applicable\'94 than the argument from disagreement. I do not think it fares any better.  \
\
The first reply to the argument from queerness Mackie considers is this: perhaps objective values are not so strange (in that they are like essences, numbers, substances, necessity and possibility, causation, etc.) even though they are *are* unlike descriptive facts. (Call this the Partners in Crime reply.)\
\
But Mackie thinks the Partners in Crime reply would be ultimately impotent if we could show that we can \'93on empiricist foundations\'85we construct an account of the ideas and beliefs and knowledge that we have of all these matters\'94 (19). He does not try to construct such an account. But even if an empiricist foundation could not be given, that failure would indeed not support the existence of objective values but tell *against* the existence of essences, numbers, and so on.\
\
The success of the objection that objective values are not saliently different from other unobjectionable abstract entities or concepts like necessity or causation depends on the details. Russ Shafer-Landau[@shafer2003moralrealism], Terence Cuneo[@cuneo2007], David Enoch[@enoch2011taking]f are philosophers who have recently provided these details and shown (though I shall not try to show it here) that indeed objective values are not any more objectionable than other kinds of abstract objects. For example, Cuneo argues that whatever \'93objectionable features\'94 moral norms display are also displayed *inter alia* by epistemic norms. If Mackie is an \'91epistemic skeptic\'92 then he must deny the intrinsic, categorical, reason-giving force of such epistemic value judgments as *you ought to believe whatever proposition is supported by the best evidence.*\
\
The epistemological part of the argument from queerness is that objective values, if they existed, would be known through an utterly unique and correspondingly queer faculty (19). He doesn\'92t just mean they would be unverifiable empirically (that too). He means that it is difficult to imagine how something like Plato\'92s Form of the Good could be such that \'93knowledge of it provides the knower with both a direction and an overriding motive; something\'92s being good both tells the person who knows this to pursue it and makes him pursue it\'85 the end has to-be-pursuedness somehow built into it\'94 (20). But, Mackie thinks, Hume has successfully argued that reasons (instances of knowing that p) cannot be \'93reasons\'94 (instances of motivating to act). The notion that values and disvalues intrinsically influence the will to pursue and avoid them postulates \'93value-features of quite a different order from anything else with which we are acquainted, and of a corresponding faculty with which to detect them\'94 (20). \
\
To further underscore the weirdness of objective value, Mackie poses the question of how we are to suppose moral qualities relate to natural facts. Even if we argue that the moral quality of wrongness \'93supervenes\'94 on or \'93is entailed by\'94 the natural facts (say, on the fact that the children are lighting the cat on fire), we deserve an account of the alleged supervenient or entailed quality. More likely than that we are able to \'93just see\'94 the \'93wrongness\'94 in the natural state of affairs, it seems more likely to Mackie that we are recognizing ordinary qualities such as that the action is socially condemned, and that we disprove. \
\
\
###  Further Replies\
\
The argument from queerness does not tell much \'97 if at all \'97 against the existence of objective moral standards. Mackie\'92s argument has been called, and rightly so, an fallacy of the appeal to personal incredulity. The argument from personal incredulity has something of the form of \'93If on my assumptions or background beliefs p is hard for me to believe, then p is false.\'94 If I were to be cheeky, I would say summarize Mackie\'92s argument from queerness \'97 the \'93even more important\'94 of the two arguments that there are no objective values \'97 like this: *To someone who shares my hidebound scientistic ideology, abstract objective values with intrinsically motivating features seem weird. Therefore, objective values they don\'92t exist.*\
\
Now this reply is certainly too pugnacious. Mackie\'92s argument is influential and expresses, in compressed form, some widespread beliefs that he defends at greater length elsewhere, and that are defended by others. But it is true that objective values seem incommensurate with metaphysical naturalism, or physicalism, or scientism. My point is that one who is firmly convinced of scientism might express (as Mackie does) a dismay at the notion of objective value; but one who is firmly convinced of objective value might express dismay at the notion of scientism. Absent further support for the dogma that all of the universe is *nothing more* than a manifold of physical objects, these two are expressions of dismay are equally valid and therefore equally useless. \
\
Christine Korsgaard has also replied to the argument from queerness. She concedes that categorically-obligating entities are different from other entities, but denies the suggestion that they therefore do not exist. She says: \'93It's true that they are queer sorts of entities and that knowing them isn't like anything else. But that doesn't mean that they don't exist.... For it is the most familiar fact of human life that the world contains entities that can tell us what to do and make us do it. They are people, and the other animals.\'94[@korsgaard1996sources 166.] This reply seems to me right. \
\
Mark Timmons has clarified one part of Mackie\'92s argument to be the worry that the supervenience of moral properties on non-moral properties (such as biological or psychological ones) is somehow mysterious.[@timmons1999morality] In response, Russ Shafer-Landau has offered compelling arguments that such supervenience is no more or less objectionable than the supervenience of higher-order natural properties (like life) on lower-order natural properties (like certain cellular or molecular structures).[@shafer2003moralrealism, chapter 4.] Shafer-Landau also critiques the Humean theory of psychology that underlies part of Mackie\'92s worry about queerness.[@shafer2003moralrealism, chapter 5.]\
\
\
## Conclusion\
\
Mackie\'92s famous arguments attempt to overcome the prima facie case that moral values are objective. His case attempts to show that the acceptance of moral values is so undesirable and so highly implausible that it outweighs even the very undesirable consequences of their rejection. In this paper, I have tried to show that his first argument (from relativity or disagreement) does not prove or even very plausibly suggest that all values are merely subjective. Rather, the existence of objective values (and the sometime difficulty of discerning them) explains moral disagreement better than the subjectivity of values; furthermore, the existence of objective values (and the sometime ease of discerning them) explains widespread, cross-cultural, trans-generational moral agreement about general and specific moral claims like that stealing is wrong and caring for the poor is admirable. \
\
I have also tried to show that his second (\'93more important\'94) argument amounts to a re-statement of how things appear to one already convinced of philosophical or metaphysical naturalism rather than a persuasive case that such appearances accurately represent reality. All of the legitimate puzzles about objective values or objective moral laws that Mackie\'92s account highlights can be \'97 and have been \'97 dealt with quiet respectably by other authors. \
\
In short, there very much seem to be objective values. The best explanation of this appearance is that there are objective values. And the opponent of the appearances has much more difficult task than Mackie \'97 or perhaps anyone \'97 has ever been able successfully to perform. \
\
\
[^1]:The doctrine of objective value that Mackie ascribes to the \'93main tradition of European moral philosophy\'94 is indeed assumed in Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, and even Kant.  C. S. Lewis puts this way: \'93This conception in all its forms, Platonic, Aristotelian, Stoic, Christian, and Oriental alike... is the doctrine of objective value, the belief that certain attitudes are really true, and others really false, to the kind of thing the universe is and the kind of things we are... I myself do not enjoy the society of small children: because I speak from within the Tao I recognize this as a defect in myself \'97 just as a man may have to recognize that he is tone deaf or colour blind.\'94 @abolition.\
\
[^2]:  On skepticism: One kind of moral skeptic rejects conventional morality or his own society\'92s morality but endorses another modified morality or alternative set of putatively objective values (13). Another kind of moral skeptic might even accept conventional morality (as a fiction, say) but deny that morality is about anything \'93out there\'94 in the world.  On subjectivism: The \'93first order, normative, view\'85 that everyone really ought to do whatever he thinks he should\'94 is irrelevant (14). As a second order view, \'91subjectivism\'92 sometimes refers to the thesis that declarative sentences with a predicate of value just express the approval or disapproval of the speaker. Mackie is not at pains to defend this kind of expressivism. Rather, he defends a negative thesis that objective values do not exist. Now, if objective values do not exist, then we might naturally wonder how and why moral language functions the way it does. But these are separate questions. Mackie\'92s theory is not a type of expressivism but of error-theory.\
\
[^3]:This actually happened. The mother plead guilty. See the local news story at http://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/detroit/2015/06/29/detroit-mom-back-in-court-in-freezer-bodies-case/29454321/}