{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### Replies ### \
\
While I agree with much of MacIntyre\'92s picture of the development of western civilization, there is far more in his proposals than I can comment on, let alone defend. Instead, I\'92ll surface and discuss a few particular objections. \
\
### Response 1 ###\
\
**Incoherence of Tradition Objection.** I\'92ll respond to the last objection first, since it seems to me the most tangential to MacIntyre\'92s ethical theory. I think it true that tradition influences our standards of rationality, justice, and virtue, but demonstrably false that it *constitutes* such standards. The law of non-contradiction is the counterexample. \
\
Every tradition affirms the law of non-contradiction; every tradition denies rational agents the right to believe (P & ~P). Any tradition that denies the law of non-contradiction, it seems to me, is an irrational tradition. And I don\'92t just intend to say it is irrational relative to my own standards of rationality, but that it is irrational full stop and possible to \'93step outside\'94 my tradition far enough to see that. If there even does exist any person (such as Nagarjuna) or community or tradition that affirms (P & ~P), we ought not interpret them as having a different standard of rationality but rather we ought to interpret them as believing that rationality is an obstacle to nirvana. Affirming contradictions is still irrational, but it is the kind of irrationality needed to do violence to the limits of rationality and transcend them. \
\
So I think MacIntyre\'92s unqualified claims about tradition constituting rationality should be limited to claims about other standards for acceptable kinds of evidence, etc. \
\
### Response 2 **Relativism Objection.**  MacIntyre has himself refuted the charge of relativism multiple times. J. L. A. Smart\'92s refutation I find the most instructive. \
\
### Response 3\
**Primary Virtue Objection.** Which of MacIntyre\'92s concepts of virtue is the primary sense? I would disagree that virtues enable an agent to achieve the goods internal to any individual practice (like chess-playing). Those qualities are akin to virtues but not virtues except in a derivative, analogous sense. If I were to emphasize their difference from virtues in the primary sense, I would simply call them individual skills; if I were to emphasize their commonalities, I would call them virtue-skills.  Skills are \'91acquired human characteristics\'92 that share certain features with virtues: they are habitual, learned, and can contribute to an agent\'92s character. But they are only derivative in that they contribute to goods of this or that particular practice rather than of the general project of living flourishing human lives. MacIntyre seems to concede this distinction when he concedes that some practices might be oriented toward wicked ends. So virtue-skills are not, by definition, traits that benefit their possessor. \
\
The second layer of virtue is a skill that emerges within social practices. Skills related to political activity is an example. These skills are not even conceivably individualistic; they are always performed by people with other people within a community. And yet this layer or dimension is not, I would argue, the primary sense of \'91virtue.\'92 The reason is that communities can be corrupt. An entire social group can engage in a social practice that is itself vicious, that is antithetical to human flourishing. The social practice of trading slaves might be an example. A community composed of members who each have the skill of performing that activity in such a way as to achieve the goods internal to slave-trading would seem to count as \'93virtuous\'94 by MacIntyre\'92s loose standard, but this feels forced. The intension of the term \'91virtue\'92 is partly, by definition, good activities (meaning good for creatures like us). \
\
So it seems to me important that only MacIntyre\'92s third layer or dimension of virtue is properly so called. Virtues that contribute to the goods internal to the \'93practice\'94 of human life as a whole. We must conceive of human life as a narrative unity, with beginning (birth and childhood) middle (maturity and adulthood) and end (decrepitude and death). Those qualities such as courage, moderation, kindness, generosity, affability and so on that contribute to success qua human flourishing are properly virtues. They help us to flourish, they are necessary conditions of a flourishing human person and community. Of course, this is the sense of the term \'91virtue\'92 that Aristotle gave millennia ago. \
\
So if only this third dimension of the MacIntyre\'92s concept of virtue deserves the unqualified epithet \'91virtue,\'92 and if that concept was already explicated in detail by Aristotle, then is MacIntyre\'92s painstaking construction of a three-layered account pointless? There is a point of importance to be extracted, I think. That important point can only be seen if one builds up to the concept of virtue from (potentially value-neutral) individual practices or skills to (potentially value-neutral) social practices. \
\
### Response 4 **Ends/means Objection.**\
\
\
\
### Endorsements\
One thesis I would like to extract, develop, and defend is this: human practices are necessarily end-directed (teleological). \'93Social teleology\'94 has at least two and possibly three aspects: individual, collective, and human. The first aspect of social teleology is the end-directed behavior of each agent; the second is the end-directed behavior of social groups, like families, nations, clubs, congregations, and so on. The third, and most objectionable, aspect, is the end-directed activity of our species as a whole. What, if anything, does every human being intentionally pursue? \
\
The answer to this question is bound to be controversial. But before we try to answer it we can pause and point out that MacIntyre has made the question intelligible and urgent. \
\
Human life is, in some sense, a practice. It can be brought under the concept of a grand unified whole practice or pluralist set of practices. Human life is, at least viewed under this concept, therefore teleological and indispensably so. Iris Murdoch argued as much in her famous essay (1950) \'93The Sovereignty of Good over other Concepts.\'94  Even if human life has \'93no external point or \uc0\u964 \u949 \u955 \u959 \u962 \'94, it has one from within. We pursue projects. It is impossible, in other words, to bring our own human life under the concept of an event. \
\
This insight has important implications for ethics, as well as other fields: action theory, sociology, anthropology, philosophy of mind, and so on. I shall not explore those implications here. Michael Thompson has explored the implications for \'93practical philosophy\'94 (some metaphysics, philosophy of mind, philosophy of action, and more) in his *Life and Action: Elemental Structures of Practice and Practical Thought.*[@thompson2008life] This assumption-trouncing work is radical not in its conclusions but in its simplicity and depth of insight. Thompson argues that the concepts of practice, action, and life are successively larger conceptual spheres, where the latter includes the former, but where the former is constitutive of the latter. And upon reflection, each concept exhibits an undeniable Aristotelian structure. Modern theoretical and practical philosophies that obscure these concepts or miss the mark obstruct progress in practical philosophy. \
\
While I cannot do justice to Thompson\'92s admirable work here, I mention it to point out that MacIntyre\'92s thesis about \'93social teleology\'94 \'97 the irreducibly teleological or end-directed nature of individual and group human activities \'97 seems correct. And if it is correct, it demands the re-evaluation of some cherished assumptions. \
\
### Metaphysical Biology Objection\
\
MacIntyre's whole ethical case is built on the recovery of telos. Without telos, there can be no virtue. \
\
### We need telos for virtue because deontological virtues are too hard\
He has forcefully (and I think persuasively) argued, virtue without telos becomes unintelligible. A society that highly values some virtue (say, chastity) but does so only out of habit --  without any wisp of certain knowledge about the effect chastity has on a man or woman's whole life --  will not long retain that high opinion. Chastity as a white-knuckle fiat not to engage in sexual intercourse with anyone other than one's opposite-sex spouse is simply too difficult, psychologically and morally, to seem valuable to someone who has no clue why chastity is so good for us, and why sexual license is so disastrous for humans, families, and societies. \
\
### Telos and virtue (and life, and self) are an organic whole\
If MacIntyre's suggestion that we need to recover the Aristotelian tradition of the virtues is to be taken as a serious plan, then we must recover telos. That is, we must discover or re-discover the organic holism of the narrative unity of my life, my identity and self-concept, the telos of human life as a species and my own specific telos as a member of that species, and the virtues that are the qualities that enable me to achieve my telos. Not one of these parts can be left out of the whole. \
\
### What if there are no ends in nature? \
One powerful objection to the recovery of telos is that there is no teleology in nature. There are no *ends* (\uc0\u964 \u949 \u955 \u959 \u953 ). Call this position *teleological nihilism.* There are two forms of teleological nihilism: extreme and moderate. Extreme teleological nihilism we may call the view that there are no "purposes" or natural ends anywhere in the world *including* in human actions. Even our practices, behaviors, and lives are purposeless, even to ourselves. Moderate teleological nihilism we may call the view that there are no natural purposes *except* those in human actions, intentions, and societies, etc. On moderate teleological nihilism, human purposes are not instances of a broader category that includes the tendency of an acorn to become an oak and the tendency of deer to survive and reproduce; human purposes are sui generis phenomena that spontaneously emerge out of our brains at a certain level of complexity. Final causation thinking is then projected out onto the world by us; we observe that the beaver gathered wood and that the beaver built a dam and we say "the beaver gathered wood *in order to* build the dam." But really the beaver did no such thing. This is what philosopher of biology Ernst Mayr calls "teleonomic" natural behavior, but not genuinely teleological.[@mayr1992teleology] \
\
Teleological nihilism claims as its evidence *modern science* as a whole. Natural sciences have dismissed the notion of final causation for three or four centuries now and have gotten along well without it. In fact, natural sciences and the experimental, empirical methods that advance them have progressed far more than anyone could have dreamed. In part, this success is the result of giving up magical thinking. \
\
### Even if there were no natural teloi, human action is teleological\
MacIntyre has a powerful response to this objection. It is, I think, satisfying. And that is that the conversation about the broader metaphysical implications of teleology can be side-stepped. We know that *human society is teleological.* All the activities *we* do, as humans, and activities *we do* in groups (the Republican or Democratic Party, the YMCA, the U.S.A., the Parent Teacher Association, Starbucks) is end-directed actions and practices. That is enough. Call it "social teleology." \
\
Christine Korsgaard has defended the notion of practical reason as the faculty we discover in ourselves *after* we are already acting in the world and reflecting upon our actions.[@korsgaard1996authority] It is not really up for debate that we are reflective creatures; everyone reading this is capable of reflecting on their actions, asking for and providing *reasons* for action that may or may not justify the action. This is close, I think, to MacIntyre's way of thinking. \
\
Our social practices *just are* intelligibly teleological. They cannot be understood without teleology. And that is enough to get MacIntyre's ethical case off the ground. Telos can be recovered by reflecting on my actions, practices, and my whole life. With telos firmly in place as in indispensable part of my worldview, regardless of whether telos exists in nature more broadly, I can go on to recover the virtues. \
\
### Section Conclusion\
\
}