{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
##Scientific Ethics 2 - Frank Jackson\'92s Functionalism\
\
\
Frank Jackson is a physicalist, moral realist, and cognitivist (though he laments that epithet). He sees the main problem with moral realism as (an iteration of) the location problem. The key question is how to ground the \'93meaning of ethical ascriptions and sentences in purely descriptive terms.\'94 (Jackson, From Metaphysics to Ethics 113). \
\
In thinking through Jackson's sophisticated and influential arguments, things are going to get heavy on the metaphysical side of metaethics. \
 \
Frank Jackson\'92s From Metaphysics to Ethics defends the entailment answer to the location problem. The location problem is roughly how to locate ethical or semantic or other queer properties in the world understood in reductive, physicalist terms. Where is truth, meaning, goodness? The entailment answer is roughly that all the subvenient facts (of sub-atomic physics, chemistry, biology, etc.) entail all the supervenient facts (of psychology, ethics, etc.). Just as solidity is not a feature of the physical story of a physical thing but it is implicit in or entailed by that story about an interlocking atomic lattice, so tallness is not a property that features in the story about the physical heights of various people in the room but tallness is entailed by their various heights. \
\
Conceptual analysis is the process of drawing out these entailments and understanding the relation between base and supervenient property. Jackson defends \'93conceptual analysis\'94 against objections that it is a mysterious search for the a priori or that conceptual analysis was discredited by Quine. \
\
He says metaphysics is about "what there is and what it is like", not a "shopping list" but a limited list that explains everything else.  The list of basic ingredients ought to be smaller than the list of explananda. \
\
\'93Serious metaphysics requires us to address when matters described in one vocabulary are made true by matters described in  another. But how could we possibly address this question in the absence of a consideration of when it is right to describe matters in the terms of the various vocabularies? And to do that is to reflect on which possible cases fall under which descriptions. And that in turn is to do conceptual analysis.\'94\
\
He is a cognitivist in that hbalfoure thinks \'93ethical sentences are truth-apt... semantically able to have a truth-value.\'94 (Jackson 113). Cognitivism is compatible with subjectivism, so long as the ethical judgment in question (say, \'93I like that\'94) is semantically able to have a truth-value. Since language is a physical tool (sounds and signs and so on) for conveying information, to \'93represent things as being\'94 this and not that way (Jackson 114). Language \'97 at least, language about contingencies \'97 sorts out possibilities into categories of those that are and those that are not. This account includes conditional statements like \'91If P then Q\'92 where \'93competent speakers [say such things] just when the conditional credence of Q given P is high enough in the circumstances for assertion\'94 (Jackson 116). \
\
In the \'93Role of Folk Theory\'94 Jackson summarizes and endorses a few folk or common sense judgments about ethical properties. \
\
\
Ethical and normative properties referred to by ethical terms like \'93rightness\'94 and \'93wrongness\'94 are real properties. He clarifies that he is \'93not taking a stand on the debates over universals in analytic ontology, but merely affirming that truth supervenes on being, and that successful predication supervenes on nature\'94 (Jackson 118). \
\
Ethical properties supervene on descriptive properties, meaning that for any two possible worlds if they have all the same physical properties then they have all the same ethical properties. \
\
The role that \'93rightness\'94 plays in folk morality serves as a raw material from which to start and goal toward which to strive when looking for the descriptive condition (call it M) that is extracted by the Ramsey-Lewis method. But not just any current folk moral proposition will serve \'97 it must be mature folk morality. Mature folk morality is \'93where folk morality will end up after it has been exposed to debate and critical reflection\'94 (133).  Ethical properties supervene on the comprehensive list of physical properties in question. \
\
The divide between \'93is\'94 and \'93ought\'94 is not a divide between semantics. Jackson says, \'93I have to regard the purely descriptive terms as essentially given by a big list of terms that would generally e classified as such, and see the aim of the exercise as the analysis of ethical terms in some way or another in terms of this big list\'94 (120). Moore would object. Moore\'92s assertion that goodness is a non-natural property Jackson summarizes as the claim that \'93what is left of language after we cull the ethical terms is in principle inadequate to the task of ascribing the properties we ascribe using ethical terms\'94 (121). I could not, sans evaluative terms like \'91beautiful,\'92 \'91lovely,\'92 \'91shapely,\'92 \'91lush,\'92 \'91gorgeous\'92 etc., really describe what a rose looks like by just describing its color, shape, size, chemical composition, lifespan, etc. \
\
Jackson is agnostic about whether mature folk morality will indeed ever converge into one, coherent, universally agreed-upon whole. He believes it will, but accepts the possibility that a fundamentally plural set of moralities is in fact the mature set (Jackson 137).  \
\
\
The bottom line, however, is clear: \'93any ethical way of carving up how things are is equivalent to some descriptive way of carving up how things are\'94 (Jackson 139). This is a strange conclusion: it is in one way too open and in another way too closed. It is too open about exactly what description will correlate isomorphically to a particular evaluation. He has concluded that it is possible that what is right (evaluatively) will have in every case some descriptive correlate. What he hasn't concluded is that what is right is what \'93maximizes expected hedonic value\'94 or any other such thing. This openness Jackson seems to prize, calling it \'93ecumenical\'94 (Jackson 142). But I don\'92t see why he should. On my view, we already know that maximizing pleasure is, on balance, a good idea. Most pleasures are innocent pleasures that involve no corruption. Most pleasures *can* admit of excess and so when they are combined with moderation can be enjoyed. What we don\'92t know (or maybe some of us know but the rest of us don\'92t agree) is whether the meaning of the term and fact of maximizing pleasure is identical to the meaning of the term and the fact of goodness. Jackson's conclusion is too closed in that it makes moral progress or moral discovery a species of scientific progress or factual discovery. On my view, we already know what it will take something more than scientific discovery to open new moral horizens. Jackson's thought makes the saint someone who through experimental methods discovered something new about the world, a new description that correlates to a new evaluation. The astonishment we feel at moral heroism is just a species of the astonishment we feel at first learning, say, that sub-atomic particles can act on each other at a distance, or that time is relative to the speed of light rather than vice versa, or that water bears (tardigrades) can survive in deep space. I find this highly implausible. The saint is someone who astonishes us with magnanimity, patience, courage, extraordinary love, and so on \'97 who opens up distinctively moral horizens. \
\
	\
##Open Questions\
\
The open question argument applied to Jackson is fairly clear: even supposing that an action A has the proper descriptive property D under conditions M such that it satisfies the role mature folk morality assigns to rightness, is it actually right? That is, does it satisfy my (or our) assigned role of rightness as we understand it today? \
\
Jackson defends himself against the open question argument in two ways. The first defense is that mature folk morality is still maturing and so we should not expect it to be complete. Some ethical truths are not extant and won\'92t be for an indeterminate amount of time. Some openness is to be expected. If we ask him \'93is it actually right?\'94 he can respond that we don\'92t know for sure but time will tell. \
\
Two critical responses, at least, are called for. The first problem is that \'93time will tell\'94 is not the right kind of openness. As Boyd makes clear, some ethical judgments are quasi-analytic in that they are so true it is almost inconceivable that they should ever turn out to be false; they could never imaginably be vetoed by any future discovery of physics or psychology. In Jackson\'92s terms, some pieces of folk morality are already maximally mature. The judgments, say, that torturing children for fun is cruel and that cruelty is wrong, (bad, impermissible, unlawful, disrespectful, unnatural, painful, vicious, or whatever other imprecation you like) have been sufficiently subject to debate and critical reflection. Indeed, I would argue that anyone willing to seriously \'93debate and critically reflect\'94 on whether or not torturing children for fun is actually wrong by that very willingness demonstrates a moral defect. \
\
A second problem is that the term \'93mature\'94 is evaluative. When some philosophers define truth or rationality in terms of an \'93ideal observer\'94 who is fully informed and critically reflective, they slip into the descriptive definition an evaluative or prescriptive notion \'97 that the observer is ideal in a positive sense. Jackson does the same. It would be too crude to paraphrase the notion of mature folk morality as the moral principles of people who are correct.  But there is something of circularity in trying to ground the evaluative property D in purely descriptive terms when one of our descriptive terms is evaluative. \
\
Jackson might respond that \'93mature\'94 is only evaluative or normative about intellectual processes of debate and reflection rather than about ethical or practical processes of action or sentiment. Again, as we saw in response to Richard Boyd <ref>Boyd on intellectual or epistemic virtues<ref/>, evaluative terms like reasonable and rational are not ethically neutral. Arguably, they are centrally related to ethical evaluations. It is wrong to be intellectually dishonest. \
\
\
Jackson distinguishes what is open and what is closed abou folk morality by distinguishing \'93general principles broadly stated\'94 (Jackson 132, original emphasis). The normative principles he cites are instructive: \'93killing people is normally wrong; we agree that people wo claim to believe that somethign is very wrong but show not the slightest incliniation to refrain from doing it are in some sense insincere; we agree that certain character traits associated with the virtues are intimately connected with the persons\'92 dispositions to o what is right; and so on.\'94 (Jackson 132). The specifics are, however, liable to \'93a great deal of disagreement\'94 (Jackson 133). \
\
Jackson includes in his account what I have called the paradox of knowing and not knowing the good. The distinction he draws is that folk morality gives us the raw material, so to speak, of most \'93initially appealing\'94 parts of morality of which some parts survive as plausible by being vindicated by \'93critical reflection\'94 (Jackson 134-5). For instance, utilitarians must give up (as an exceptionless moral rule or first principle or quasi-analytic statement) that it is always wrong to punish the innocent.\
\
\
Anscombe criticizes utilitarian (or any other consequentialist) philosophy on just these lines. \'93It is a necessary feature of consequentialism that it is a shallow philosophy... it has in fact been the mark of all these [consequentialist] philosophers that they have been extremely conventional; they have nothing in them by which to revolt against the conventional standards of their sort of people; it is impossible that they should be profound\'94 (Anscombe, \'93Modern Moral Philosophy\'94). The problem is that we might being \'93open\'94 to reconsidering an ethical standard that should be closed. One fundamental aspect of being an ethical or moral person is refusing to reconsider certain norms. Anscombe continues, \'93But if someone really thinks, in advance, that it is open to question whether such an action as procuring the judicial execution of the innocent should be quite excluded from consideration\uc0\u8209 -I do not want to argue with him; he shows a corrupt mind.\'94 \
\
Jackson may not show a corrupt mind, but he does play the dangerous game of reconsidering quasi-analytic, necessary-seeming propositions. But this game must be played by any ethical theory. That\'92s just the way it goes. He says, \'93We tease out the consequences of the view or views under discussion; we identify those that seem most at odds with current folk morality\'97 in other words, the consequences which strike us as most counterintuitive; and consider whether we are prepared after critical reflection to accept the consequences, that is, to modify folk morality so as to accord with them.\'94 (Jackson 135). \
\
##Ramsey Sentences\
A Ramsey sentence is a conceptual apparatus invented by positivist Carnap to explain why metaphysical questions are meaningless unless they can be translated into empirical sentences. \
Ramsey sentences take an apparently meaningful folk sentence like \'93Electrons are real,\'94 empty the theoretical content, and replace it with empirical content that is supposed to do the same assertoric work. \
\
For a philosopher like myself who has never one been tempted by the charms of positivism \'97 a hopeful but hopelessly incoherent dream that knowledge can be made clear, mundane, and irrefutable to any one with five senses \'97 it is hard to build a conceptual structure on such a flimsy conceptual foundation as Ramsey sentences. But even so, let us take them seriously. \
\
One critique is that Ramsey sentences do not do the actual work of correlating ethical (prescriptive or evaluative) and non-ethical (descriptive) properties. They just show a theoretical way such a correlation might go. Jackson admits that ethical vocabulary is indispensible \'93in practice\'94 (124). How does one acquire the possibly infinite disjunction of descriptive properties that correlates to the term \'91wrong\'92, and how does one deploy it in a dispute with one\'92s sibling, if one is only five years old? \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ##An Objection or Two \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
The sophistic charm of Jackson\'92s account comes from talking a lot about carts and horses but reversing the cart and horse. The true ethical properties make a possibly infinite disjunction of descriptive properties true, not the other way around. \
\
Jackson\'92s account points to a correlation \'97 at best, an isomorphic correlation \'97 between ethical and descriptive properties, between our uses of the term \'91right\'92 and the role, exhaustively described, played by rightness. \
\
\'93Fairness is what fills the fairness role; rightness is what fills the rightness role; and so on\'94 (Jackson 140). \
\
David Enoch objects along similar line.\
\
>\'93I am going to grant that every normative property is necessarily co-extensive with a natural one. What I am not going to grant, then, is the identity of necessarily co-extensive properties. The common examples that are used as (purported) counterexamples are things like triangularity (having three angles) and trilaterality (having three sides), or the property of being the number 2 and the property of being an even prime,10 or \'96 more closely to our context \'96 the property of being an obligatory action and the property of being such that it is an essential property of God to command all persons to perform it (assuming some suitable version of a divine command theory).11 Intuitively, it seems that these are distinct properties, even though they are necessarily coextensive. Of course, proponents of the argument above may just dig in their heels, and insist that in these cases too the seemingly distinct properties are actually identical (though the relevant concepts may be distinct, of course). And so we find ourselves at a frustrating impasse\'94 \
[@enoch2011 138-9](Enoch 2011,  138-139; Enoch, Taking Morality Seriously, 138-9).  \
 \
\
##Functionalism is not Metaphysics Objection\
I have long puzzled over how functional theories (of consciousness, morality, etc.) have gotten by under the appellation of metaphysics. If I asked an astronomer what a planet is, he might reply with some examples: \'93Mars, Venus, Earth.\'94 And if I pressed him to give me not just examples but a definition, he might say \'93a massive spheroid orbiting the sun.\'94 But suppose I press him on that criterion by citing the 43 Kuiper Belt objects that are massive, spherical, and orbiting the sun. We are still, I think, talking about physical object. He could reply that we don\'92t exactly know what counts as a planet, but that size and the amount of orbital room the object has between its neighboring objects seems important to our definition. Well and good. \
But suppose now that I ask an astronomer what a planet is and he answers that \'93it\'94 is \'93whatever\'94 large object orbits suns. If he said that a planet is \'93whatever fills the planet role\'94 he seems to have given up talking about physics and objects. Does he really mean that \'91whatever\'92 it may be that turns out to fill a planet role is a planet, whether it is round and solid or not? That it does not ultimately matter whether the object is even in deep space? For perhaps I could build pieces of architecture or technology that occupy the planet role, and could therefore build planets. These conclusions seem to me absurd. \
The point is this: Either the functional role of the \'93whatever\'94 is determined in part by the 
\i kinds of objects 
\i0 that could possibly fill that role, or it is undetermined. If it is undetermined, then the absurdities above follow, and we have a reductio for the functional role account of objects. If it 
\i is 
\i0 determined, then we must give a functional role 
\i and a determinate set of criteria about the object. 
\i0 That is, we must do traditional metaphysics.  	\
\
Stopped at 143 %\
Stopped % 89 I do not have a view on these special characteristics of the moral. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\fs22 \cf0 Stopped @ 121 in Metaphysics to Ethics\
}