{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \

\b Outline of chapters\
\

\b0 In chapter 1, I argue that normative realism is true. Chapter 1 has 2 parts. In the first, I summarize what I take to be the facts that need explaining. These explananda are the variety of kinds of normative discourse and objects of normative discourse represented in our life as lived. In the second, I argue that the best explanation of these phenomena will be normative realism: that is, normative discourse is truth-apt, that normative propositions are either true or false when they represent or fail to represent the normative facts. These arguments are not intended to persuade normative nihilists, whose objections are far too subtle for me, or perhaps anyone, to pursue. \
\
In chapter 2, I assume that naturalism is true, but far too vague to be useful. Chapter 2 has 2 parts. In the first part, I tell the history of naturalism as a philosophical doctrine and the concept of nature, science. In the second part, I taxonomize contemporary naturalisms and push for clarification of its key terms, namely, 
\i nature 
\i0 and 
\i science. 
\i0\b \
\

\b0 In chapter 3, I argue that either normative realism is true or reductive physicalism is true. But normative realism is true, so physicalism is false. Chapter 3 has 3 parts. In the first part, I lay out the naturalistic metaethical options: physicalist functionalism, and relaxed naturalistic consequentialism. In the second part, I argue that the first is false. In the third part, I argue that consequentialist physicalism (even of the non-reductive sort) is hopelessly inadequate to the facts laid out in chapter 1. \
\
Chapter z has x parts. In chapter 4, I argue that Thomas Nagel\'92s anti-metaphysics is true but not true enough.  a sort of rationalistic quietism of Thomas Nagel, the scientific consequentialism of Richard Boyd and the Cornell Realists, the neo-Aristotelianism of Philippa Foot. I shall argue against quietism, and consequentialism.\

\b \
\

\b0 Chapter v has x parts. In chapter 5, I argue that neo-Aristotelianism is true as a virtue ethics and a metaethics. \
\
Chapter y has x parts. In chapter 6, I argue
\b \
}