{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
# Chapter 1: Introduction, Flow of Arguments\
\
### Draft 1\
This dissertation defense the thesis that human virtue and human values are not part of nature in the same way that nonhuman rocks and trees and animal brains are part of nature. \
\
If this thesis is right then either anti-realism is true or non-naturalism is true, but ethical naturalisms (of the extant variety) are unlikely to be true. I assume that anti-realism is false until the final chapter, in which I provide a few brief reasons to think the assumption is true. Non-naturalism I argue to be the most likely true explanation for our understanding of human value and virtue. \
\
* In chapter 1 outline the keywords and key premises and propositions pertaining to this thesis, especially naturalism, non-naturalism in the context of the debate about values like goodness and beauty and virtues like justice, courage, or contentment. \
* In chapter 2, I discuss the historical background of this debate from Democritus and Aristotle through G. E. Moore, Arthur Balfour, and turn of the 21st century. \
* In chapter 3, I critically appraise reductive ethical naturalism as articulated and defended by Richard Boyd, Frank Jackson, Nicholas Sturgeon and others. \
* In chapter 4, I critically appraise non-reductive ethical naturalism as articulated and defended by Thomas Nagel, Hilary Putnam, and others.\
* In chapter 5, I critically appraise neo-Aristotelian naturalism, as articulated and defended by John McDowell, Philippa Foot, Rosalind Hursthouse, and Stephen Brown. \
* In chapter 6, I further explain and defend my own view of morally realist virtue theory in relation to ethical non-naturalism. \
\
### Draft 2\
\
This dissertation defense the thesis that virtue theory is the ethical framework with the most plausibility but that it is incompatible with the type of naturalism that is in 2014 is touted by 49 percent of analytic philosophers. The corollary of this thesis is that either virtue theory or such naturalism must be rejected. \
\
There are three kinds of people that might be interested in the arguments in favor of this thesis and against it, besides those who are generally is interested in ethics and meta-ethics. The first is philosophical naturalists who are on the hunt for a theory of morality that both takes morality seriously and rounds values and virtues and human happiness in nature. The second is those supernaturalists who are interested in arguments for virtue theory and wondered whether virtue theory is somehow aligned with a supernatural metaphysics. The third are virtue as assistants who might be wondering how their distinctly ethical theorizing connects with various broadly metaphysical frameworks.\
\
### Draft 3\
\
This dissertation defends the thesis that human virtue cannot be naturalized but that virtue talk is the best (most practically useful and theoretically plausible) kind of ethical theory we have. In this way, my  metaethical account that can be described as morally realist, non-naturalistic virtue ethics. \
\
There are two kinds of reasons to disbelieve my thesis. The first is allegedly more plausible alternative theories (or anti-theories) of morality: deontology, utilitarianism, moral nihilism of various stripes. The second is objections to my thesis. I shalI respond to each reason. But my responses will not be symmetrical. Regarding the first reason, evaluating the global persuasiveness and plausibility of a single ethical theory as a whole is hard work for one book, let alone all rivals to virtue ethics. So I shall content myself with identifying which plausibility points won by each side if it can explain a few, common, core judgments or values, like that friendship is a good thing, that is laudable to love and wonderful to be loved, and common assessments we make of admirable people. Regarding the second reason, I shall surface as many objections as I can find in the literature, learn from colleagues, and think up myself. I shall polish them up as well as possible and articulate them as sympathetically as possible and then, of course, do the hard work of refuting them as well as possible. \
\
My primary thesis is directed at those who already accept or lean toward virtue theory in general. For those, the reasons to accept virtue theory are redundant; for others, my reasons here to accept virtue theory are liable to be more tantalizing than persuasive. I shall point to the writings of a diverse group of virtue theorists\'97 like Rosalind Hursthouse, Julia Annas, and John McDowell \'97 who are different from each other in many ways but united about virtue. \
\
The question within virtue theory that I want to answer is this: can virtue theory be plausibly naturalistic? Are notions of virtue, happiness, flourishing, and notions of physicalism, naturalized epistemology and so on incompatible? Is neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism either Aristotelian or ethically naturalistic, but not both? I shall argue that they are incompatible. For many of naturalist orientation, this will decrease the global plausibility of virtue ethics. If the notions of virtue, along with honor, chastity, and slavery, are relics of the past, so much the worse for them. Naturalism is the philosophy of the future, for science is the philosophy of the future. But we cannot be too sanguine here. \
\
My secondary thesis is directed to just those who are undecided about virtue theory or already committed to one of it\'92s rivals. The global plausibility of virtue theory in light of a reasonable view of cosmology, politics, and psychology is very high indeed, as others before me have shown. But the global plausibility of naturalism is very high, as well. The tension between the two, if there is any tension, is cause for intellectual concern. Some naturalists have argued that the only alternative to moral realism is moral nihilism, which is such an unattractive position th\
\
In order to make all of this tolerably clear, I shall have to define \'91naturalism.\'92 This is no easy task, and takes up a good bit of space in the chapter x. Naturalism we might call a movement. The momentum it has built, starting nearly 500 years ago, has crested and reached a kind of tipping point. Either naturalism will fulfill its promise of naturalizing not just the cosmos but everything else including mind and value, or naturalism will begin to ebb. Either the naturalists who have been hopeful of the research program in philosophy and outside it will make good on the last remaining pesky puzzles, or, to the astonishment of many, naturalism will prove to be not just incapable at the moment but incapable in principle of developing a comprehensive and satisfying account of both the cosmos and the mind. \
\
\
\
###Draft 4\
This dissertation defends the thesis that virtue is a gift of God. As Plato suggested in Meno, the source of human virtue is not humanity or nature but something outside both humanity and nature. This thesis must be distinguished from a thesis in the vicinity \'97 a thesis much debated in popular forums \'97 about whether one can be \'93good without God.\'94 I think this is like asking whether a gardener can grow plants without the sun. The answer is the gardener needs sunlight but need not believe in the sun to grow plants. Similarly, if virtue is a gift from God, then the virtuous person needs help but need not believe in the Helper to live virtuously and benefit others. \
\
\
###Draft 5\
\
This dissertation advances the thesis that all extant ethical naturalisms are false. The corollaries of this thesis are that we must either elect for ethical non-naturalistic virtue and do so very soon, or else wait perhaps a long time some yet-to-be-defined articulation or yet-to-be-conceived conception of ethical naturalism. \
\
Chapter 1 reviews some of the primary discussions and attempts plausible definitions of some what are called \'91Keywords\'92 in the debate between naturalists and non-naturalists over ethics, including \'91nature, \'91good,\'92 \'91virtue\'92, and \'91human\'92, \'91practical reason,\'92 \'91telos,\'92 and \'91science\'92. \
\
Chapter 2 advances a positive version of virtue ethical theory that provides strong explanatory power over a range of moral platitudes, namely, entrenched folk moral views that seem so right, and why some sophisticated moral theories seem so wrong. Family is important. Friendship is valuable. Cruelty is wrong. The question of whether this virtue theory is \'91naturalistic\'92 is deferred. And the motivation for a naturalistic theory of ethics is highlighted. Some criteria for what our ethical theory should account for are negotiable (say, that my ethical theory should explain why I am always right and others wrong) and, after reflection, ought to be given up. The criteria suggested as non-negotiable explananda are: \
\
1. **Action** \'97 accounting for human evaluative discourse about human actions, especially objective purport; norms are action-guiding; practical reason gives reasons for practice -- that is, rational action rather than static reason and irrational activity. explaining how and why it is we act not just on desires but for *reasons*, and that there seems to be no systemic or in principle difference between prudential, moral, and other reasons. \
2. **Character** \'97 accounting for human evaluative discourse about the character of humans, including ourselves, others and even hypothetical persons like gods, angels, or intelligent extraterrestrials.\
3. **Diverse Finite Goods** \'97 accounting for human evaluative discourse about everything else, including non-humans (animals, plants, insects, etc.), and inanimate matter (mountains, deep space, the ocean, the rainforest);\
4. **Heroic Virtue **- accounting for how some exemplary good people become so good; \
5. **Openness, or Pursuing without Grasping** \'97  explaining how we know some ethical truths certainly and are abysmally ignorant about others;\
6. **Diverse Normativity** \'97 explaining the parity between epistemic and moral norms (in contrast to the absence of a parity between etiquette norms or preferences);\
\
Virtue theory (whether naturalistic or no) offers a satisfying story that explains each of these explananda individually and (even more satisfyingly) as a set. Despite the problems of virtue theory and objections thereto, none of the theoretical costs seems as high as jettisoning a ready-made explanation of one of these # criteria. The challenge is posed to others to offer better explanations individually or as a whole. \
\
Chapter X begins a critique of neo-Aristotelian naturalisms.  Aristotelian naturalism of a more phenomenological flavor proposed by Philippa Foot is critiqued. The  Aristotelian naturalism with a scientific flavor proposed by Stephen R. Brown is also examined. The problem of the fact value dichotomy is not overcome by asserting that some of human biology sets normative limits for human flourishing, happiness, and virtue. To speak adequately of all of human flourishing requires speaking of our rational nature and our biology as a union. The metaphysical problem with virtues being my virtues if personal identity has no further grounding than biology is urged. \
\
Chapter x critiques the \'93third alternative\'94 between supernaturalism and reductive naturalism as espoused by Rosalind Hursthouse and John McDowell. The third way is a kind of groundless intersubjectivism wherein no further grounding is required, a non-transcendental idealism that avoids the myth of givenness (that some empirical truths come for free without any interference from our intellect) and the myth of objectivity (that some intellectual truths come for free without any help from our senses). The problem of moral nihilism rears its head. \
\
Chapter x rehearses criticism of various ethical naturalisms, beginning with non-cognitivist naturalism. If virtue ethical moral realism demands supernaturalism, then perhaps it is better to deny realism in general. But non-cognitivism (except expressivism) collapse into moral nihilism, which is not only implausible, but in light of primary, substantive normative and moral questions, morally reprehensible. Expressivism, albeit much more sophisticated and hard to exactly critique, collapses into a kind of ethical skepticism or nihilism that is inconsistent especially with Criterion 4. \
\
Chapter x critiques cognitivist ethical naturalism of the non-scientific flavor, where the good (say) is an ethical/natural property saliently different from other kinds of natural properties. It then critiques cognitivist ethical naturalism of the scientific flavor, where the good and other values are ethical/natural properties not saliently different from other natural properties like natural kinds. These fail to account for Criterion 3 and 4. \
\
Chapter x answers a few remaining objections, and considers whether (if no satisfying theory of ethical naturalism currently exists) it would be better to trust naturalism and wait for an ethical theory some day, or trust our ethical theory and abandon naturalism today, or very soon. In light of the ambiguity of the term naturalism, this final chapter concludes with some suggested re-conceptualizations of the five Keywords. \
\
\
\
\
### Draft 6\
\
That we ought to love each other is true if anything is true. Life as lived is puzzling. Among the many puzzles that confront us, some of the most enduringly fun and bewildering are ethical puzzles about how we know what is good and whether there is a good at all.  These questions are given a special bite. \
\
This dissertation advances a naturalistic metaethical theory that combines moral realism and virtue theory. My thesis involves three claims: that nature consists of some normative facts and other facts in a radical continuity, that at least some those facts can be and in some cases are known, and that knowing and acting on them is (for rational creatures like us) the best way to live.\
\
The question of naturalism will occupy much of our discussion. And it will take us into the *metaphysical* side of metaethical debates. I for one enjoy the variety of discussants and styles across philosophical metaphysicians and ethicists, but some may find the presence of so much metaphysical discussion strange alongside so much ethical discussion. \
\
Normative ethical theories (about duty, virtue, pleasure, the divine will, etc.) are normally taken to be competing and non-trivially distinct from metaethical theories about what grounds duties, virtues, human pleasure, God's decrees, etc. This received wisdom is wise. And yet, to paraphrase Thomas Nagel, sanity in our metaethics is most preserved by keeping primary ethical concerns near to our mind.\
\
Explanations explain phenomena that puzzle us. There are, in many cases, competing explanations that can't both be true but that are both plausible. If I find a broken window in my home office and a stick on the ground, on the face it may be that some neighborhood menace was breaking windows for fun, or that my tree outside lost a branch in the wind. An explanation is (always?) underdetermined by the data. \
 \
There are two ways to offer an explanation: as an argument (contending against others) or as a framework (aiming for consistency and coherency and plausibility). When offering the first kind of explanation qua argument it is necessary to attack other frameworks and defend one's own. When offering the second kind of explanation it is necessary to fully explicate the theory, drawing out aspects and clarifying or defending them. The plausibility of a framework then depends, for the reader, on how plausible and satisfying the framework is as a whole rather than the relatively less satisfying alternatives. \
\
\
 \
\
1. Historical Background and Five Keywords\
2. Six Criteria Lock, Paradigmatic Virtue Theory Key \
3. Naturalizing Virtue 1 - Philippa Foot\'92s Biologism, Stephen R. Brown\
4. Naturalizing Virtue 2 - McDowell\'92s View from Somewhere, Hursthouse\
5. Ethical Nihilism as a Cliff\
6. Naturalizing Virtue 3 - Scientific Ethics - Richard Boyd, Railton, Robert Adams\
7. Objections, Clarifications, and Conclusions (What is Really Scientific)\
\
\
There are two ways the reader might take my main claim: firstly, as a query about virtue ethics, whether it can be naturalistic or not; secondly, as a query about ethical naturalism, whether it can be made plausible or not. Admittedly these questions are distinct and can be treated separately. But insofar as writers like Hursthouse, Foot, and McDowell address them as a unity, I shall follow suit. \
\
\
My theses are these:\
\
1. There exist some real primary norms (both epistemic and ethical) that are binding on us *qua* human beings. \
2.  These norms are in some cases, knowable and effable. \
\
Examples of such norms are 'proportion your belief to the evidence' and 'be kind to others.' \
\
If such norms are 'real' then they are mind-independent, true regardless of human opinion, etc. \
\
If they are 'binding on us qua human beings' then they truly prescribe over all creatures with practical rationality -- in other words, all creatures like us and all other potential creatures we might discover or be discovered by one day. \
\
I say 'some real norms' because, of course, not all norms are real. Norms of, say, spelling English words I take to be purely or mostly conventional. Drawing up lists of exactly which norms are real independent of human thought and which are human concepts is of course a difficult task. My task is simply to defend that the list of mind-independent norms has at least one item. \
\
The main rivals to the above theses are epistemic and moral nihilists, expressivists, and error theorists.  Some say such norms just don't exist except as concepts or social structures. Others say that if such norms existed they do not explain how we think and talk. So the arguments that such norms really exist are metanormative explanations of the way we talk, the way we act, and the we we (necessarily) think. \
\
But even among those who agree with the above theses are divided. Not everyone who agrees with the first two agree with each other. These norms seem to defy fact/value distinctions. They are evaluative facts, or factual prescriptions. At least, if they are "just values" then the fact/value gap becomes a problem. If they are fact-values then there is no gap to be overcome. But some philosophers become indignant at the notion of evaluative facts: what in the world could such strange things be? \
\
This leads to the question of whether ethical norms are 'natural'?  Are moral facts, or what I am calling simply 'norms' natural? This seems like a pressing and substantive question whose answer will affect alot. After doing the research for this dissertation, I no longer think it is a pressing or substantive question. It is not just vague but hopelessly vague; not just ambiguous but fatally ambiguous. \
\
4. Are these norms "natural"?\
	* Are these norms radically anamolous? Are they strange, queer, discontinuous? \
	* Are such norms physical/material? (Nagel, McDowell)\
	* Are such norms divine? \
5. Where do such norms come from? Do they happen to emerge from our biology? Do they come from the mouth of a god? Are they necessary features of our rational nature and other other creatures with a rational nature? \
\
My claim is that: \
\
1. These norms are 'natural' but that the question 'Is X natural?' is almost vacuous. \
	* These norms are not radically anomolous. They are not strange, queer, discontinous.  (Nagel)\
	* These norms are not material. (Nagel, McDowell)\
	* These norms are not emergent properties arising from our biology. (Foot, Brown)\
5. These norms are internally related to human nature (via practical rationality). (Foot, McDowell, Kant)\
\
For the purpose of these essays, I remain agnostic as to whether these norms come from any particular personal god. But I do claim that they are divine. The contrast is likely to strike the reader as strange. By 'divine' I mean that they transcend our animal biology and that conformity to them makes us rational, acting creatures full of wisdom and virtue.  Affirming the divinity of some norms is consonant with a variety of theistic views: Aristotle's god is neither Brahman nor Jehovah. \
\
But insofar as 'natualist' is just a label for 'atheist,' then my argument entails that naturalism is false. But I deny the charge that my view is "non-naturalistic." Insofar as 'naturalist' is a label for 'one who believes in the radical continuity of facts, the uniformity and harmony of reality,' I vehemently claim the label as my own. In order to claim the label as my own, I must show that they are mistaken who think reality is radically continuous because reality is fundamentally physical or material. \
\
The best evidence that reality is not fundamentally material is human nature, rationality and practical rationality, including primary norms. \
\
\
##### Draft 7\
\
This dissertation defends the claim that some moral and epistemic norms are real and binding on all rational agents, and that such norms are best explained in terms of human nature (what we are), human flourishing (our end), and human virtues which are the means to flourishing. \
\
There is a danger that labels, which are useful for categorization, storage, and quick reference of arguments and beliefs, become more important than substantive arguments. Let me say here how I would label my view in terms of the labels fashionable in the early 2000s, and thereafter avoid trivial disputes. I take my metaethical view to be a brand of normative realism, emphasizing moral norms but using epistemic norms as allies. I take my ethical view to be a brand of virtue ethics. Talk about virtues, human nature, and flourishing or happiness I find the most helpful in solving knotty metaethical puzzles. Sometimes, as Thomas Nagel reminds me, the only solution to metaethical puzzles is to stick to primary ethical tools. \
\
The main rivals to my claim are: (a) the belief that no moral or epistemic norms are real and binding on all rational agents; or and a group of views (b) that such norms are indeed real but best understood in other terms. There are several rivals of this second class. In order of decreasing similarity to my own conclusion, beginning with *most* similar, they are: \
\
|Rival claim | Thinker | Label |\
|-----|--------|------------|----------|\
|* b1. Real norms are best understood as features of our human nature  | (McDowell) |Ethical naturalism\
|* b5. Real norms are best understood as features of our rational minds | (Kant) | Ethical Rationalism\
|* b4. Real norms are best understood as features of our social group | (MacIntyre?)| Social construct\
|* b3. Real norms are best understood as features of our animal nature | (Foot)| Naturalism\
|* b2. Real norms are best understood as features of the "natural world" |(Boyd)| Ethical naturalism\
\
It will be quickly noticed that several of these views fly under the heading of 'naturalism'.  Hence I move to dispense with the titles. Instead, clarifying the claims, I shall argue for and against each claim in its own terms. In the final chapter I shall pick up the question of labels and definitions, again, after the dust has settled. \
\
There are a series of questions to which the best answer is "there are real norms or laws of thought and behavior that govern creatures like us." I lay out [a number] of criteria for what an adequate metaethical theory should explain. These criteria are, I hope, non-controversial, eminently common phenomena that we can all relate to. \
\
My first task in defending my primary thesis *could have been* to rehearse some of the arguments against normative nihilism, norm expressivism, etc. Instead, I shall argue that normative realism is a reasonable "defeasible presumption"[^14] that we ought to trust unless weighty objections arise. I then show that 'naturalism' provides exactly such weighty objections. But 'naturalism' is a a "philosopher's weasel-word."[^15] A naturalistic thesis, when clarified, will turn out to be one of a few kinds of thesis: \
\
[^15]:  Borrowing Terrence Cuneo's term from *The Normative Web*. \
\
* a trivial common sense metaphysical thesis; -- all that is real is real \
* a slightly less trivial anti-idealist metaphysical thesis; -- all that is material is real\
* a universal reductive materialist thesis;  -- all that is real is material; nothing that is real is non-material\
* or an atheistic thesis; -- nothing that is real is supernatural (i.e., God) [^16]\
\
[^16]: Some might think that the reductive materialist thesis is for all intents and purposes identical to the atheistic thesis. But idoloters think that their god is material and pantheists think that matter too is god. \
\
So I reframe the so-called 'naturalists objection' in these three ways. The core objection I call the "argument from radical discontinuity."  The argument from radical discontinuity, or disharmony, finds various expressions in various books and articles but has, I think, one root. That root is important and true. I show how my account satisfies that search for radical continuity. So how does my account fare with respect to so-called naturalism, after disambiguation? I detail how my account \
\
*  agrees with 'naturalism' qua trivial metaphysical thesis; \
* disagrees with 'naturalism' qua reductively materialistic thesis\
* does not disagree with 'naturalism' qua atheistic thesis. \
\
	It is indeterminate with respect to theism or atheism, though it fits better with theism. (My account makes theism more plausible and atheism less plausible. But it is not inconsistent with atheism nor does it entail theism. I call such a weak relationship a "fit" but indeterminate.)\
\
	Some will find it strange that I argue for *holiness* without necessarily invoking religion, or *divinity* without necessarily attaching it to a god. It is strange, but not uncommon. Laozi's eternal Tao is divine without being a god. Aristotle's *nous* is a god without being a person. Even Kant's Christian God is not quite Swinburne's Christian God, with purposes, plans, and personality. I take my argument to be a conclusion about signs. The nature and reality of the signified is a whole different discussion. Could someone, beginning from the existence of a sign that most clearly points to a signified, make an argument that the signified in fact exists? Yes. Could someone else deny the signified, reinterpreting the sign? Yes. But both acknowledge and admit the existence and nature of the sign, including that it seems to point beyond itself. That's all I can hope for here. \
	\
With these clarifications in hand, I proceed to examine the various rival views as espoused by their best proponents.  They all accept the reality of evaluative norms but explain them differently, offering different metaphysical frameworks and anthropological frameworks. I attempt to show in detail how each rival either misteps or goes only part of the way in the right direction. It misteps by invalidating one of our criteria. It only goes part of the way by only including some of our criteria, ignoring or disregarding the others. \
\
Having removed the teeth from the overriding motivation to be "naturalistic", these rival views turn out simply to be half-hearted substitutes for virtue. They are not even properly "rivals" nor are they clear-headed. The clear-headed work to be done is to clarify objections to virtue theory and articulate better answers and explanations. \
\
Finally, I consider objections that might show my claim to be false or otherwise inadequate (implausible, trivial, or useless). The biggest of these is that my conclusion does not "secure" the natural world from "outside" influence. The fear can be variously expressed: *You have not protected us from god.* Since I do not think that such laws are circumscribed to *humans*, the fear that there may be something or someone *else* out there -- be they aliens, angels, or gods -- is not a fear that should disturb our rational reflection on these questions. I reflect on the relation between my claim and theism. \
\
The conclusion of all this is that some kind of virtue theoretical account is not only truest but most useful. My claim, if true, helps to vindicate the excellent work in virtue ethics that is being done all over the world. It also vindicates the practical work of those leaders, parents, politicians, medical doctors, pastors, and professors, who deploy terms like 'virtue' and 'happiness' to motivate themselves and others in their care. \
\
The essays comprising this dissertation unfortunately defy categorization. The normative considerations in the first and last chapters might be called applied ethical. After all, we are trying to give good reasons and hear good reasons for our metaethical theory in order to *know* what to do with our ethical theories, and we care about our ethical theories (in part) because we care about our lives. We want to lie well, not badly. The "metaphysics of ethics" we must do (in response to Kant and Frank Jackson) to get a hold on human nature and the norms to which we are naturally sensitive requires a bit of metaphysical legwork. And, of course, there will inevitably be some room for moral epistemology, semantics, and moral motivation. With the great danger ever present that on any of these various topics I will mistep, I trust in the reader not to scoff but to correct, not to laugh but to help me learn.  \
\
}