{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 This chapter delves into some metaphysics of ethics. \
\
The belief that 'nature is it' and 'science studies nature' has arisen from heresy to orthodoxy. \
The objection from naturalists about morality or practical reasons is that they are not 'natural.' They are not real. \
They are weird, queer, strange, sui generis, unprecedented, unexplainable, mysterious, obscure, opaque, supernatural, preternatural, and (of course) unnatural. \
\
But what else is weird like norms? \
\
1. Modal facts\
2. Intentional facts -- I am thinking *about* Hawaii\
3. Mathematical facts\
5. Logical facts\
\
##Examples of the radical discontinuity objection\
\
"There is a common feeling, at least among naturalists, that explaining ethics only in terms of one kind of 'stuff' -- namely, natural stuff -- is a desirable thing, if it can be done" (Brown 2004, 7). \
\
"A fundamental tenet of naturalism is that human beings are continuous with nature" (Brown 2004, 4). \
\
\
#Chapter X -  Naturalizing Virtue 1 - Philippa Foot\'92s Biologism, Stephen R. Brown\'92s Darwinism \
\
	[In the last chapters, we have set out the criteria by which a robust and satisfying metaethical theory can explain what is most puzzling about our lives as practical reasoning creatures, and we sketched \'97 albeit quickly \'97 the skeleton of such a metaethical theory. That sketch invoked not only thin evaluative contrasts like \'91good/bad\'92, and \'91right/wrong\'92 but also thick ones like \'91courageous/cowardly\'92 and \'91happy/miserable.\'92 That sketch gave especial weight to the notion of human nature and tried to specify the distinctly human goods belonging to us by nature. Those goods we called person, interpersonal, and communal. They included individual flourishing of mind and will in intellectual and moral virtues, but the joys of friendship, camaraderie, and the joy of romantic love, including but not limited to reproduction, and social flourishing within family and polity or community that functions with harmony and justice. All of these, or something like them, rather than simply genetic proliferation, seem to us to be the human race, if anything is.\
	\
	Three sorts of responses are likely: \
	\
* \'93That all sounds about right. But much more needs to be said to clarify, disambiguate, and substantiate these claims.\
\
* \'93That doesn\'92t sound right. I have a substantive objection to one or more claims in your sketch.\'94\
\
* \'93That all sounds about right. But how do we naturalize it? How do we ensure that your sketch is consistent with naturalism per se?\'94\
Responses 1 and 2 will have to wait until later chapters. This chapter, and the next few, will be about the project of naturalizing virtue theories of which my sketch in the last chapter is a token.]}