{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Terence Cuneo - The Normative Web\
\
Terrence Cuneo\'92s fascinating book builds an argument for moral realism on the key premise that \'93if moral facts do not exist, then epistemic facts do not exist\'94 (The Normative Web 90). This premise leads us, if we affirm the antecedent, to the \'93undesirable results\'94 of having to affirm that epistemic facts do not exist. Once we affirm that epistemic facts do not exist, it follows that we do not believe anything, let alone that view, on the basis of epistemic facts. \
\
Moral facts are thought objectionable by some for their \'91queer\'92 features, such as (in the words of Lenman\'92s review of Cuneo): \
(a) the supervenience of moral facts on other, prosaically descriptive, facts\
(b) the intrinsically motivating character of moral reasons\
(c) the inescapable or categorical character of moral reasons\
(d) the supposed mysterious nature of moral facts in failing to fit neatly into a naturalistic picture of the world\
(e) the failure of moral facts to play a role in explaining other facts -- or a sufficiently rich range of such facts\
(f) the great extent and apparent intractability of moral disagreement.\
\
David Enoch agrees. \
\
\'93Why are people so suspicious of morality, robust-realistically understood? Sometimes the worries are metaphysical \'96 moral properties, or truths, or facts, or values, or duties, or some such are said to be metaphysically queer, not to find a comfortable place in a naturalistic worldview, and so on. The merits of such worries are a matter for Chapter 6, but my point here is much more limited: if you think that things like the purported fact that we ought not to humiliate others is metaphysically queer, you should be equally metaphysically suspicious of things like the purported fact that two-boxing is the uniquely rational policy in Newcomb\'92s Problem. If you find it hard to metaphysically stomach things like the value of humanity (or the negative value of pain), you shouldn\'92t (prima facie, at least) find the value of excitement more appetizing. If the scientific worldview can\'92t find room for the wrongness of murder, it is hard to see how it can find room for the irrationality and (sometimes) irresponsibility involved in wishful thinking. The metaphysical worries about morality seem to just be instances of metaphysical worries about normativity more generally.\
\
More or less relatedly, some suspicions about morality (robust-realistically understood) are epistemological in nature. If there are truths of the kind that the Platonist (say) envisages, how is it, it is sometimes asked, that we can have epistemic access to them? And if we can\'92t, should we conclude that on this view none of our moral beliefs are justified? And isn\'92t this a reductio of this kind of Platonism? Again, a discussion of the merits of this and related objections will be postponed, this time until Chapter 7. But for now the crucial thing to see is that the epistemological challenge \'96 whatever exactly its details \'96 seems to apply just as forcefully to other, non-moral normative truths and facts. So here too, the objection to Robust Metaethical Realism is just a particular instance of an objection to a similar view about the normative as a whole.\'94 (89)\
\
Cuneo\'92s \'93Interlude on Naturalism\'94 interests me greatly (101-4). \
\
>To this point I've traversed some fairly familiar territory in contemporary metaethics\'97four variants of Mackie's celebrated \'91argument from queerness\'92.20 I want now to interrupt the flow of the discussion for a moment to make a general comment about what is going on in these antirealist arguments and to draw out a further implication of my argument.\
>The four lines of argument we've considered hinge on the claim that, were moral facts to exist, they would be objectionably \'91mysterious\'92 and, hence, we have excellent reason to believe they do not exist. While it is fairly commonplace to hear philosophers say such things, it is not always so obvious what is meant when they do so. Imagine an outsider listening in on this discussion between moral realists and antirealists\'97one who, say, is used to wondering about whether there are four\uc0\u8208 dimensional space\u8208 time worms, (p.102) closed space\u8208 times, event\u8208 horizons, or universals. She might find herself deeply puzzled by the discussion thus far. What, after all, renders moral facts more objectionably mysterious than these other kinds of putative entities? And why should this oddness count against the existence of moral facts?\
>I take the answer to be that the antirealist thinks that moral facts are mysterious in two ways. They are mysterious, first, in the sense of being anomalous; moral facts don't fit into our best picture of what the world is like. Moral facts are mysterious, second, in the sense that they are impenetrable. We have no illuminating account of their nature or behavior. Of these two senses of mystery, I judge that it is the first that is doing the most work in the antirealist's arguments.21 So, let's focus on it for a moment.\
>That nothing is brutely anomalous I take to be a truism. Entities are always anomalous relative to some set of assumptions or background picture of what the world is like. And it is no secret that the background picture against which moral facts are supposed to be anomalous in the arguments we've considered thus far is a naturalist picture of the world.22 Almost without fail, antirealists object to moral facts because they appear to fit so poorly into the world picture science is supposed to give us. Simon Blackburn puts the point particularly vividly in his essay \'91How to Be an Ethical Anti\uc0\u8208 Realist\'92, when he writes that moral antirealism is \'91demanded\'92 by a naturalistic worldview and claims that, according to moral antirealists, \'91moral properties . . . are not in this world at all, and it is only because of this that naturalism remains true\'92.23 If Blackburn is right, a necessary condition of naturalism's being true is moral realism's being false. Now my own conviction is that this is not the sort of thing a naturalist ought to say. According to a popular and broadly Quinean understanding of naturalism, the naturalist's creed is that we ought to follow science wherever it goes. (p.103) Arguably, however, accepting this creed is incompatible with claiming that naturalism implies that moral realism is false, for we cannot rule out a priori that science may reveal that there are moral facts and, hence, that moral realism is compatible with naturalism.24\
>Be that as it may, what I would like to point out is that, if naturalism implies that there are no moral facts and if this claim implies that there are no epistemic facts, then naturalism gives us strong reason to believe that there are no epistemic facts. If, however, my overarching argument is correct and there are epistemic facts, then we have good reason to believe that naturalism\'97at least of the kind that is driving the arguments we've considered\'97is false. The apparent price of tying naturalism so closely to moral antirealism is, I suggest, to increase the vulnerability of the naturalist project.\
\
In a footnote, Cuneo criticises our contemporary use of the term 'naturalism', deprecating it as a "philosopher's weasel-word" that "admits of a great variety of incompatible meanings" [@cuneo footnote 22.] [^9]\
\
[^9]: Cuneo says: "(22) Blackburn (1993), Ch. 9 and (1998), Ch. 3, Gibbard (1990), Part II, Horgan and Timmons (1990/91), Mackie (1977), Ch. 1, and Timmons (1999), Ch. 1, are explicit about this. In my estimation, the term \'91naturalism\'92 is a philosopher's weasel\uc0\u8208 word, which admits of a great variety of incompatible meanings. In some senses of the term, I believe that moral and epistemic realism are compatible with naturalism. My use of the term borrows from Rea (2002), Ch. 3.\
\
Cuneo\'92s core argument he phrases like this:\
\
* (1) If moral facts do not exist, then epistemic facts do not exist.\
\
* (2) Epistemic facts exist.\
\
* (3) So, moral facts exist.\
\
* (4) If moral facts exist, then moral realism is true.\
\
* (5) So, moral realism is true. \
\
The first premise he calls the \'91parity premise.\'92 The argument in its favor rests on four \'93salient respects in which putative moral and epistemic facts are similar\'94 (Cuneo 225).  The second stage of the argument for the first premise shows that all of the \'93standard objections\'94 to the \'93objectionable features\'94 of moral facts, should they exist, would also establish that epistemic facts display the same objectionable features. \
\
Cuneo constructs \'93epistemic analogues\'94 of three \'93prominent forms of antirealism\'94 in Chapters 4-7. But each of these strategies for avoiding epistemic realism are false. The first form of antirealism is nihilism of the sort that claims there aren\'92t any epistemic facts and so there aren\'92t any epistemic reasons to believe anything. It follows that there is no epistemic reason to believe anti-realism. Epistemic nihilism can be discarded by all of us who are \'93minimally rational.\'94 \
\
The second strategy is \'93epistemic expressivism.\'94 This strategy is very sophisticated. However, Cuneo pushes the view into a disjunctive critique where expressivism either captures much of our ordinary epistemic discourse but entails that all such discourse systematically misapplies epistemic concepts or doesn\'92t capture our epistemic dicourse at all since it entails that all such discourse does not \'93involved the application of epistemic concepts at all\'94 (226). The upshot is that epistemic expressivism collapses into a skepticism not far different from nihilism. \
\
There is one other form of antirealism I do not summarize here. \
\
Even so, Cuneo has some clean up work to do. He discusses three other objections to his core argument. \
\
\'93The more expeditious manner of proceeding, which I shall adopt, is to concede that the standard objections to epistemic realism considered in Chapter 3 have some evidential force. But, I suggest that, even if we concede that at least a subset of these arguments creates problems for epistemic realism, then at best what these arguments establish is that the epistemic realist must countenance some metaphysical mysteries. If we grant, for example, that the standard objections are right to assume that supervenience relations are brute determination relations not amenable to explication, or that we have no informative account about how we apprehend epistemic facts of certain kinds, or that epistemic facts fail to play a wide explanatory role, then it follows that epistemic realism implies the existence of phenomena that are impenetrable\'97at least to agents with a cognitiveconstitution in an environment such as ours. (If the argument of the last chapter is correct, epistemic reductionism is really no different from realism in this respect; it is no less mysterious in these respects than is realism.) I submit that countenancing mysteries of these types, while perhaps not very attractive in some respects, is a significantly better theoretical option than embracing wholesale epistemological skepticism. Accepting mysteries of these types is, for example, not as such irrational; indeed, arguably, were there mysteries of this sort, they would be among many other mysteries that philosophers must accept (issues regarding the nature of intentionality, qualia, free choice, numbers, and so forth, spring to mind.) Embracing radical skepticism, by contrast, is irrational, for one cannot be a minimally rational agent and accept that there is no reason to believe anything. And on the plausible assumption that, if given a choice between accepting two incompatible positions, the acceptance of only one of which is compatible with being minimally rational, then we should accept that position\'94 (Cuneo 241-2).\
\
	Stopped % 243 III. The Third Objection. Not sure I need to go on. }