{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red102\green102\blue102;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
3. Annas, Julia. Plato\'92s Ethics: Old and New. Cornell. 1999.\

\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\i0\b\fs28 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Julia Annas, 
\i Platonic Ethics, Old and New
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf2 0. Introduction\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 She aims to examine Platonic ethics with an eye more to the so-called Middle Platonists than to Aristotle or modern scholarship, because they share (unlike even modern virtue ethicists) his eudaimonist presupposition and (unlike Aristotle) deeply care what Plato actually thought (2-3). They do not use the \'93developmental\'94 approach (3-4). They think Plato\'92s view is that virtue is sufficient for happiness (5). Their view of Plato\'92s teachings on pleasure is (to us) fresh (5-6). They, and Plotinus, see how Plato connected happiness with becoming like God (6). \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf2 1. Many voices\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Plato is thought by the skeptical Platonists to have no doctrines of his own, but to commend a \'93model of philosophy\'94 as \'93arguing against positions\'94 (10). The later Platonists thought he had doctrines (11). Reading their interpretations disengages us salubriously from our own assumptions (11).\
\
Does Plato have doctrines of his own? Socrates self-describes himself as a barren midwife but also propounds some doctrines. Plutarch helps us see that as 
\i teacher 
\i0 he only worked against the views of his interlocutors, while 
\i as philosopher 
\i0 he worked to elicit recollection (a la Meno) in his listeners/readers. The skeptical Platonists took it that the deconstructive work was successful and never made it to their own constructive views (passing scrutiny); the \'93doctrinal Platonists were more optimistic\'94 (22-23). \
\
Tracking Plato\'92s development \'97 if there is one \'97 corresponds to his develping use of the historical Socrates, and finding the historical Socrates is hard. Stylometry hasn\'92t helped (26). Comparing with a clear and certain historical biography is impossible (28). Albinus, by contrast, treats the dialogues like a circle: no matter where you start, you will be able to track the whole shape (27). The common objection against unitarian interpretations is that they flatten out or ignore distinctions and contradictions between dialogues; developmental approaches do this too, and sometimes worse (29). \
\
The point is that it might be worthwhile to set aside the developmental/unitarian debate and read the ancients (30). \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf2 2. Transforming your life: virtue and happiness\
}