{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Frankena, \'93The Naturalistic Fallacy\'94\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 Overview:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Frankena aims to discuss just what the Naturalistic Fallacy might be. According to him, the \'93definist\'94 fallacy \'97 defining two things as one thing (regardless of whether one of them is an ethical property and the other a natural property) \'97 is closer to Moore\'92s argument. So \'93yellowness is pleasantness\'94 is just as much an error of defining two distinct things as one thing as affirming \'93goodness is pleasantness.\'94 The real error of definists, according to intuitionists, is that they don\'92t see the unique undefinable property of goodness. The real error of intuitionists, according to definists, is that they hallucinate a unique undefinable property of goodness. Unless and until we can correct this error we should leave off accusing people of \'93fallacies\'94 that are not really logical. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Synopsis:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\f1 \cf0 \uc0\u9679 
\f0 	The naturalistic fallacy in the premise (b) (on 469) that \'93What is sought by all men is good (by definition).\'94 is the identification of goodness with \'91being sought by all men\'92 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\f1 \cf0 \uc0\u9679 
\f0 	To identify good with even some metaphysical property \'91being equal\'92 or something, would be the naturalistic fallacy, according to Moore. \
\ls3\ilvl0
\f1 \uc0\u9679 
\f0 	The naturalistic fallacy is not a logical fallacy, since it can feature in valid arguments (468)\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f1 \uc0\u9679 
\f0 	Consider the syllogism (a) Pleasure is sought by all men.  (b) What is sought by all men is good (by definition). (c) Therefore, pleasure is good. Moore denies that (b) is an ethical proposition \'97 it is just a definition. The only reason this is an error is if we already know that goodness cannot be defined \'97 something Moore asserts but does not argue except by begging the question. \
\ls3\ilvl0
\f1 \uc0\u9679 
\f0 	The real error behind the so-called naturalistic fallacy is what Frankena calls \'93the definist\'94 fallacy, \'93the process of confusing or identifying two properites, of defining one property by another\'94 (471). This error is independent of any process of defining ethical concepts in terms of non-ethical concepts. Those who argue that goodness just is pleasantness are arguing that the two properties 
\i are identical. 
\i0 To charge them with a fallacy is simply to beg the question, to assert that they are wrong without consideration. \
\ls3\ilvl0
\f1 \uc0\u9679 
\f0 	Is goodness definable? If any term is indefinable, then any attempt to define it will err. But if it is definable, then some definitions will be correct. \'93It is begging the question in favour of intuitionism to say in advance that the quality of goodness is indefinable and that, therefore, all naturalists commit the definist fallacy. One most know that goodness is indefinable before one can argue that the definist fallacy 
\i is 
\i0 a fallacy\'94 (473). \
\ls3\ilvl0
\f1 \uc0\u9679 
\f0 	The real dispute, then, between intuitionists and definists (whether naturalistic or metaphysical) is whether propositions like \'93the desired is the good\'94 are analytic (tautologous, true by definition, etc.) or synthetic. Intuitionists claim \'93at least a dim awareness of a simple unique quality or relation of goodness...\'94 and definists \'93claim to have no awareness of any such quality\'94 (474). This dispute cannot be resolved by allegations of fallacy.\
\ls3\ilvl0
\f1 \uc0\u9679 
\f0 	The real error of definists is, if anything, \'93a kind of blindness, analogous to color-blindness\'94 and the real error of intuitionists is \'93a corresponding moral hallucination... verbalism, hypostatisation\'94 (475). \
\ls3\ilvl0
\f1 \uc0\u9679 
\f0 	The real method of resolving this disputes, then, is \'93the basic problem of contemporary philosophy, but no generally satisfactory solution of the problem has yet been reached\'94 (477). \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Reflections:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 This is an excellent piece. He teases out Moore\'92s real complaint with metaphysical and physical (including psychological) definitions of the good. Moore presumes the good to be unique and undefinable, then reproaches those who define it either by reference to being (Plato) or human happiness (Mill). The problem is not (1) using non-ethical premises to support ethical conclusions, nor (2) making analytic definitions of an ethical term by non-ethical terms, but defining the ethical term at all. If it is undefinable, then surely the philosopher attempting to define it will always go awry. But is it undefinable? His argument proves too much, that yellow is undefinable too. The problem is confusing ethical and non-ethical terms or treating them as the same. But the dispute is between those who avow to see an undefinable, intuitable property, and those avow not to see it. So one side accuses the other of moral blindness; the other side accuses the one of moral hallucination. While this dispute may be tractable, and may be very real and important, it is not a dispute over a \'93fallacy.\'94\
\
It is fashionable now a days to deny the \'91is-ought\'92 distinction altogether. Hilary Putnam wrote a book on the collapse of the fact/value distinction. He has worked his way into a much more theistic position. \
}