{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 \
II. Summary \
(Write first)\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 {\listtext	1.	}Mackie argues the thesis that \'93there are no objective values\'94 (13). Values like goodness, rightness, wrongness, and also beauty or ugliness are \'93not part of the fabric of the world\'94 (13). The ontological part of this thesis is that such values do not exist. The epistemological part is that, even if they did, we would not know them. \
{\listtext	2.	}He calls this conclusion \'93moral skepticism\'94 but distinguishes it from other varieties of moral skepticism.  One kind of moral skeptic rejects conventional morality or his own society\'92s morality but endorses another modified morality or alternative set of putatively objective values (13). Another kind of moral skeptic might even accept conventional morality (as a fiction, say) but deny that morality is 
\i about 
\i0 anything \'93out there\'94 in the world. \
{\listtext	3.	}Mackie distinguishes various meanings of \'93subjectivism\'94, a view in the vicinity of his own. If objective values do not exist, then we might naturally wonder how and why moral language functions the way it does, assuming the intelligibility of objective values. \
{\listtext	4.	}After explaining just what sort of subjectivism he intends to refer to, and some of the assumptions and implications of his thesis, he argues for his thesis. \
{\listtext	5.	}The moral skepticism thesis that there are no objective values he supports with two considerations: the absence of moral values is the best explanation of \'93moral relativity\'94 (or moral disagreement) and objective values, if they existed, would be objectionable queer. By queer, of course, he means, weird, unique, unprecedented, unusual, sui generis, strange, baffling, mysterious, opaque, and so on. \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	6.	}The argument from relativity or disagreement is this: moral codes vary between societies at a time and within a society across time. One society endorses polygamy, another condemns it; one society endorses human sacrifice, another condemns it; one endorses revenge killing, another condemns it. An explanation of the wide variation and instability of these endorsements and condemnations, as well as the accompanying attitudes of approval, disgust, honor, is that there are no objective values at work. The moral code of a society is not a map of what is \'93really\'94 morally lawful, but a map of that societies attitudes, endorsements, and condemnations.\
{\listtext	7.	}A reply to the argument from relativity. There is another explanation, that varying moral codes \'93express perceptions, most of them seriously inadequate and badly distorted, of objective values\'94 (18). People and societies vary on evaluative matters in the same way and for the same reason that people and societies vary on scientific, historical, legal, and other matters.\
{\listtext	8.	}But this reply is, Mackie thinks, false. The disagreements between people and societies \'97 the varieties of moral codes \'97 is similar to scientific or historical disagreements. Scientific disagreements arise between people offering different \'93speculative inferences or explanatory hypotheses based on inadequate evidence\'94 (18). I think Mackie is suggesting that two people might dispute a particular point (is Pluto a planet? Is this the tooth of a dinosaur or platypus?) because neither of them has fully accurate knowledge and both are doing the best they can with the available evidence, though future evidence may be forthcoming. \
{\listtext	9.	}Mackie is seriously misguided here. That there is disagreement between people and societies and variation between moral codes is not good reason to be skeptical about moral values; it is rather good reason to think values are indeed objective. \
{\listtext	10.	}Moral disagreement is not good reason to be skeptical about the objectivity moral values because such disagreement is saliently identical to scientific and philosophical disagreement; and scientific and philosophical disagreements are not good reason to be skeptical about scientific realism or optimistic engagement in philosophical dialectic. Some scientific disputes will probably never be resolved with reference to new empirical data \'97 what happened seconds before the Big Bang? What is the necessary and sufficient condition for a discipline to be considered a science? \'97 And certainly some philosophical disputes certainly will never be resolved by adequate empirical evidence. Is idealism or empiricism or rationalism true, or something else? The persistence of idealists, rationalists, empiricists etc., for the last 2000 years (at least) shows that such disputes are ongoing and not likely to be resolved. If that idealogical disagreement is evidence that there is no fact of the matter \'97 no objective truth \'97 then perhaps Mackie can use moral disagreement as evidence that there is no objective value. But if he thinks, say, idealism is false and empiricism true, despite the existence of people and schools of thought who mistakenly hold that idealism is true, then he ought to think also that (say) those who hold Moral Code A are getting the objective values accurately, while those who hold Moral Code B are mistaken. \
{\listtext	11.	}A second objection to the argument from relativity Mackie considers: some moral principles \'97 very broad principles \'97 are universally recognized: it is good to promote the general happiness. \
{\listtext	12.	}Mackie counters with the puzzling complaint that arguing that broad, elevated moral principles  are objective entails that specific, practical moral principles are contingent \'97 \'93if things had been otherwise, quite different sorts of actions would have been right\'94 (19). This complaint has the tone of voice and flavor of a counter without the substance. It is eminently true that \'93if things had been otherwise, quite different sorts of actions would have been right\'94 \'97 if for instance humans could breath underwater, then waterboarding would not be wrong because it would not be torturous and therefore cruel. If Bob\'92s society was communist then amassing capital for his own personal use would be selfish and illegal and therefore antisocial. These counterfactuals are just what we would predict if general moral principles reflected universal, objective values. \
{\listtext	13.	}A final reply to the objection to the argument from relativity that some broader moral codes are universal: Mackie suggests that most people\'92s moral lives and moral judgments do not actually operate according to specification of \'93general principles.\'94 Rather, people seem to make moral judgments and live their moral lives according to certain \'93immediate responses\'94 and \'93basic moral judgments\'94. \
{\listtext	14.	}Thankfully, Mackie does not spend too much time elaborating on this paper thin reply and moves on to the argument from queerness. We can reflect on our own moral judgments for a moment to explore what it might mean that we often make moral judgments as immediate aroused responses. For example, perhaps we hear a news story about a woman beating, scalding, suffocating, and finally murdering her children before storing their corpses in a freezer. [http://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/detroit/2015/06/29/detroit-mom-back-in-court-in-freezer-bodies-case/29454321/  \
{\listtext	16.	}That immediately strikes me as cruel, sick, degraded, disgusting, and wrong. It \'93arouses\'94 disgust in me immediately. Whether this response is the logical extension of a moral principle I reflectively endorse (such as \'93parents should care for their children\'94 or \'93cruelty is wrong\'94) or merely a pre-reflectively, visceral attitude is irrelevant to whether the moral judgment accurately reflects the objective value of parental love. \
{\listtext	17.	}Mackie might have focussed more on moral codes that are transcultural and span all known historical periods: for example, the universal prohibition on incestuous relationships, the blame of immoderation (drunkenness or alcoholism are condemned in every society in the world), the praise of justice and compassion, specifically caring for the poor, widows, and orphans. These are not \'93general\'94 principles but rather specific, and universally agreed upon, transcultural moral codes that are best explained as expressions of objective value. \
{\listtext	18.	}The famed argument from queerness Mackie calls \'93even more important\'85 and certainly more generally applicable.\'94 It has a metaphysical and epistemological part. \
{\listtext	19.	}The argument from queerness builds on the sense that \'93if there were objective values, then they would be entities or qualities or relations of a very strange sort, utterly different from anything else in the universe\'94 (19). Objective values would be esoterica, akin to non-natural qualities, Plato\'92s transcendent Form of Good, or like divine commands from heaven, they would be authoritatively prescriptive, empirically unverifiable. We could be as poetic as possible to make the descriptive seem mundane and the prescriptive seem unspeakably mystical. \
{\listtext	20.	}A reply to the argument from queerness: perhaps objective values are strange (in that they are not like descriptive facts) but they are not so strange (in that they are like essences, numbers, substances, necessity and possibility, causation, etc.). \
{\listtext	21.	}But Mackie thinks this reply would be ultimately impotent if we could show (and he does not try to show) that we can \'93on empiricist foundations\'85we construct an account o the ideas and beliefs and knowledge that we have of all these matters\'94 (19). So the success of this objection, that objective values are not saliently different from other unobjectionable abstract entities or concepts like necessity or causation depends on the details. Terence Cuneo, David Enoch, and Russ Shafer-Landau have provided these details and shown (though I shall not try to show it here) that indeed objective values are not any more objectionable than other kinds of abstract objects. \
{\listtext	22.	}The epistemological part of the argument from queerness is that }