{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## Chapter Conclusion ## \
\
MacIntyre\'92s work is difficult to pick apart and summarize or critique in fragments. The compressions of his orchestral arguments in this chapter are inevitably going to leave some readers dissatisfied, perhaps even dismayed, by what I have made it appear that he is saying. Readers are of course invited to revisit the source. But if my summaries have captured with any accuracy the outline\'92s of MacIntyre\'92s contribution to virtue ethics, then we can say a few things with some confidence: virtue is, for MacIntyre, primarily an acquired human trait that enables its bearer to achieve characteristically human goods that are necessarily related to human life; secondarily, we may call virtues or virtue-like those qualities that enable their bearers to achieve goods internal to social and individual practices. Practices are in part constituted by their practitioners \'97 biologists can change what biology is from within; farmers can advance what it means to farm. But practices are also constitutive of traditions. Traditions are, again, are socially embedded arguments playing out over time and across generations. \
\
Differing traditions explain differing accounts of virtue. Though MacIntyre\'92s career began in straightforward engagement in dialectical disputes about philosophical ethics, it turned a corner when he thought to treat ethical disagreement in a manner analogous to the way Kuhn treated scientific disagreement. The result of turning this corner \'97 MacIntyre\'92s own paradigm shift \'97 was an account wherein he argues (similarly to some postmodern philosophers) that malleable traditions define standards of rationality, justice, and virtue. But he also argues, to the chagrin of postmodernists, that traditions are answerable to the world, and can be falsified.  He argues that a thoroughgoing cultural relativism (or \'93tradition-relativism\'94?) is inadequate. Such a theory holds the promise to explain why various cultures disagree about what qualities are virtues (humility or pride? acquisitiveness or contentment?) and why the same culture disagrees over time with itself about what exactly defines a particular virtue (is chastity moderation of sexual pleasure or just abstinence?) \
\
Though MacIntyre\'92s theories are built on many implicit assumptions, each of which a critic might make explicit and dispute, the conclusion we have found some reason to believe is that virtues are qualities inherently related to the teleology of practice. Human life, action, and practice are all teleological or end-directed. A philosophical ethics built on mere legalism says that some actions are inherently wrong in violating moral laws, or inherently irrational in violating laws of practical reason. Such legalism runs the risk of ignoring or denying the teleological dimension of practice. A philosophical ethics built on mere consequences says that some actions tend to be wrong in that they tend to produce undesirable or unhappy consequences. \
\
\
### Chapter Conclusion There are probably natural teloi as well ### \
\
Now, MacIntyre later changed his mind about the "metaphysical biology" objection. He later thought that it could be answered a second time, even more strongly. It is not just *social teleology* that necessarily exists as part of our human nature; teleology is in some sense part of non-human nature as well. He came to accept the Thomistic and ultimately Aristotelian argument that natural causes include both efficient/material causes and formal/final. He, along with many others, came to believe that modern science has succeeded *in part because of* an enduring belief in final causation or natural teleology, not because of a rejection. The story about scientists dispensing with final causes in biology and astronomy and chemistry is largely a myth. Scientists and philosophers of science abound who can give empirical and rational grounds for thinking nature is riddled with final causation. \
\
MacIntyre's *ethical* case does not depend on this more robust account of natural teleology. All it needs is social teleology. But if it turned out that social teleology was in *instance* of natural teleology -- that the ends of human nature were a type of the ends of nature per se -- then the framework in which virtues enable the achievement of human ends would certainly be given additional credibility. \
\
Making the case on behalf of natural teleology I shall not do here. That is a task for the next chapter. \
}