{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### Stephen Brown Chapter\
\
Brown's project is to advance the cause of neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism.  His opening lines are these: \
\
>Human beings are a species of social animal for which there is a characteristic way of life. An individual human being may be evaluated as good or bad according to how wall that individual realizes the human way of life. I argue that there is teleology in nature; that the fact/value gap -- however we reasonably construe that idea -- is not an overriding concern; and that neo-Darwinism is no threat to the theory. (Brown 2008, 1)\
\
Brown's aim is to defend a species of ethical naturalism that is cognitivist and in which "important ethical norms and evaluations are grounded in natural facts." (2008, 2). He does not reject outright but rather brackets the supernatural. And he defines 'nature' as "what[ever] our latest and best science tells us it is" including psychology and sociology along with physics and biology. \
\
What is the explandandum for ethical naturalism? There are several. Each may need to look to its own science for an answer. \
\
* How an individual comes to have the norms he or she does: psychology, personal history. \
* How a group comes to have the norms they do: sociology, anthropology, etc. \
He admits, and seems melencholically resigned to the fact, that what we "end up with [might be] a mere description and not, alas, a justification..." (Brown 3)\
\
The metaphysical framework in which Brown wants to build ethical naturalism is this: nature is teleological. (Compare Nagel's natural teleology and ) He doesn't want to reduce ethics to biology or physics, but to explain ethics in "terms of the *rest* of nature" (Brown 5, quoting Bernard Williams). But what is the "rest of nature?" Especially if human beings are radically continuous with nature, as he avers, why do we even keep such locutions as "the rest"? He means that "the rest" of nature includes non-human stuff (rocks, stars, trees) and non-ethical human stuff (psychology, biology, culture, etc.). But wait. Does ethical naturalism have to ground normative facts in non-normative facts? No. He, along with Nagel, finds this dogmatic starting point unjustified. Rather, some normative facts are brute (for their domain at least) and ground other normative facts. These natural normative facts are natural teleological facts. "Teleology allows us to infer normative conclusions" (Brown 5). \
\
He also wants to account for our criterion [x] that ethics seems objective. He also wants to account for the sense that ethics can be or should be a science or something like a science or continuous with another recognizable science or (at the very least) not inconsistent with other recognizable sciences. \
\
#### Social Utility \
As a social group, we have a common good. For Aristotle -- and Brown seems to agree -- your good, my good, and our social good are intimiately interrelated. \
\
Social and political pluralism has pros and cons. Brown hopes a naturalistic ethical theory may be of some use in negotiating the "methods of dealing with conflicts among divergent belief systems" (2008, 10). Rather than rooting putative ethical truths in contentious religious claims, we may hope to root ethical truths in a universally accessible nature. We may hope to have "freedom *of* religion as well as freedom *from* religion", enjoying whatever truths might originate from a religious tradition without relying on that religion (10). We may hope that the one thing that unites us, our common human nature, may be a source of commanility in guidance on how to live. \
\
\
#### Telos and Function - General considerations\
The way we discover our common nature is by examine our *ergon* (our proper work). Brown says that this ergon is almost *function*, but not quite. He summarizes Aristotle's famous argument that *eudaimonia* is our good but seems to favor the second argument. \
\
>If we know a thing's function, then we can easily figure out what it is for the thing to function well. A thing's functinong well is its best good. Thus, if we know what the function of a human being *qua* human being is, then we can figure out what it is for a human being to function well, and this well functioning of a human being is the best good for that sort of being. (Brown 23)\
\
The function of a thing, in Aristotle, is the work it performs that is not also the function of other things. Each thing like 'hammer' has a differentia from all non-hammers -- namely, pounding or hammering. And each type of hammer has a differentia from other hammers: framing, finishing hammer, mallot, sledge, etc., all pound but pound different objects or do so differently. But human beings live and grow and metabolize like plants; we sense perceive like horses, oxen, and other animals; our ergon 'expresses' or 'requires'  *reason* (or as Foot would have it, speech). Our function is to reason; our good is reasoning well. \
\
How reasoning well relates wth virtue is a bit trickier. Are virtues simply (by definition) the reasonable activities? If so, then the connection between reason and virtue remains tight. But if not, they need to be connected. \
\
I was illuminated by Brown's discussion of three related concepts:\
\
* the human good\
* the good human being\
* good for a human being\
\
Here is one way of putting it: If virtue is the human good, then a good human is virtuous, and virtues are (as we say of spinach and broccoli) "good for us." By "virtue is the human good" we seem to mean our good qua species. By "good for us" we mean something more specific to individual members of the species. Something related to the human good is good for us in that it feels good, actualizes our potential, fulfills us, perfects us, or something like that. \
\
\
#### The function of artifacts and natural kinds\
\
What is the function of a horse? Brown's discussion effectively explores all the options here. Unlike a knife or other artificial object, the function of a horse would not be defined by human artifice. Nor is a horse's function or ergon obviously some work relating to human use (riding, pulling, etc.). It is implausible to suppose that a species is indexed to another species, that a the species is incomplete without being used by humans; furthermore, the individual jobs horses do might be more effectively done by other species (oxen, etc.). But horses have been in some part bred by humans for human purposes (riding, showing, fighting, hunting). So it might be that the *current* breeds of domesticated horses *are in fact* more like knives than wild dogs. Even so, what about other non-domesticated horses? Either they have no ergon at all, or their ergon is something unrelated to human artifice. \
\
Take the first option: horses have no ergon, no function, no discernable final cause, no unique activity they do that nothing else in nature does. Does this option mean we are giving up on "natural teleology" for biology? Plato and Aristotle both speak as if all of nature was teleological. So it would mean giving up on the platonic or Aristotelian version of teleology, for whatever that is worth. But Plato's teleology in the *Timaeus* is admittedly mythical and speculative, while Aristotle explores non-teleological explanations of natural phenomena in his *Physics*, the he says that "Nature does nothing absurdly or to no purpose" (*De Caelo* 291b14). So we haven't quite given up on Aristotle yet. Rather, we need to hear how, if at all, he articulates the natural teleology of individual biological species. \
\
#### An argument by analogy?\
\
Brown highlights that Aristotle's argument by analogy amounts to a rhetorical question with which he is trying to "badger" us.  Aristotle's human craftsmen have jobs or functions -- the carpenter works with wood, the horse trainer trains horses, and so on -- so are we to say that humans have no function?\
\
* Humans A, B, C, etc. (qua roles we play, mothers, fathers, craftsmen, etc) all have functions. (via observation)\
* Therefore humanity (qua species) have functions. (via inductive generalization)\
\
* Humans (qua members of the species) are like craftsmen.\
* All craftsmen have functions. (via observation)\
* Therefore humans (qua species) have functions. (via analogy to first premise)\
\
But in what way are humans "like" craftsmen? Aristotle's argument crucially depends on whether one accepts the fundamental comparison between humans qua biological creatures and the roles humans play. \
\
\
#### Contemporary methods\
\
Brown's suggestion is to apply more familiar methods for finding function. Suppose we find a mysterious artefact in an archeological dig. How would we discover its function? We would compare it to similar known objects of the same time and place, if possible. If there are no similar objects, then we might use the object for various purposes to ascertain what it does (not just what it does *uniquely well*). Of course, multiple objects do the same thing: Brown mentions that phones and email both communicate across long distances. \
\
A response: His example doesn't tell. The "primitive human stumbling across various items" does not have time to familiarize herself with the telephone and email. He does not mention that, given time and/or instruction, the primitive human would discover what we industrialized moderns already know: that email is most often best for asynchronic communication, and phone most often best for synchronic communication. \
\
Regardless, Brown suggests that the biologist looking at organs "faces similar problems"  (Brown 2008, 30). She can compare the functions of similar organisms; if no similar organs are forthcoming, she can see what it *does*. And she can "look at the organ from an evolutionary standpoint" -- that is, "see what effects the existence of the organ has on the survival and reproduction of the organism" (Brown 2008, 30). This last does not invalidate the Platonic/Aristotelian method of looking for what the organism does best, but supplements it. \
\
#### The human function\
So what about human beings qua species? Forget my individual telos for a moment. When we examine the function of any old item of human life, say, a knife, we see that it cuts. \
>What is the purpose of cutting vegetables? To prepare them for cooking. Why prepare vegetables for cooking? So we can eat them. What is the purpose of eating? so we can go on living. The series could stop there, but one could continue on and ask what the purpose in living is. In that we confront an existential question. (Brown 31-32)\
Before strongly arguing for or against any of the options, Brown mentions and considers several. \
He briefly considers just ending the series by repeating the last answer: we eat in order to keep living, and we live in order to keep living -- the end. He also considers that the question loses its species-indexed meaning at this point and becomes member-indexed -- what is *my* purpose.  He also considers whether that question has any meaning \'97 perhaps it is an idle and ill-framed question \'97 but ultimately endeavors to answer it. Finally, he considers what would be the significance of answering in the negative. If I qua member of my species have no intrinsic purpose does that mean that any of my self-selected purposes \'97 from social work to suicide \'97 are equally good? \
\
Brown ultimately concludes that we have no purpose qua human being. We have roles which are inseparable from purposes, even if there is no \'93humanity\'94 at the base of these roles by which to judge a deeper or ultimate purpose. \
\
A response: I don\'92t think feeble speculations to the contrary will very satisfyingly hinder a suicidal person, in the grips of existential despair, from contemplating the wildest and most irrational deeds of harming self and other. That is not to say that my philosophy would. For the bar is set high for philosophies that would explain (a) why most people prefer to live and indeed love life, and (b) why, in spite of *arguments
\i * 
\i0 to the contrary, (a) is still true. \
\
Carrying on with the notion that our roles define us, Brown considers a theological version of the story. The function of life is \'93to love God, to do His will, to serve Him.\'94 (Brown 2008, 33). One\'92s job is not only one\'92s career but one\'92s calling to live for God in every respect: professionally and personally and so on. \
}