{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ####Is  the meaning of 'good' fixed a posteriori by 'what is good for human flourishing as individual, society, and species?'\
\
1. It seems that it is so fixed, for what else could 'good' refer to but what is good for us? \
2. Also, \
\
On the other hand, we are supposed to care for the environment partly for our sake and partly for its own sake. \
\
I answer, every living thing has a good. And even some nonliving things plausibly have a good, or deserve treatment in some way. Artefacts and natural objects might demand something of us; we might be governed by norms with respect to them. \
Imagine this thought-experiment: Joe is sitting on his porch one day in Wilmore, Kentucky, sipping a glass of bourbon on the rocks. An interdimensional being suddenly appears at his side. The being appears both benevolent and intelligent. After some effort warming up its vocalizing organs (quite unlike our lung/tongue/larynx system), it utters, in English: "Hello Joe. I am from distant universe completely unlike yours. You will never reach it by technology or magic, but we can freely transport here interdimensionally. My people are dying of a grave and terrible illness. The only cure, our doctors and priests have discovered, is the blood of a human. A single drop of your blood, extracted in less than a second and without pain or side effects, would be converted to an anecdote and mean the difference between our extinction and our survival. The prophesies indicate that you are to be that human, but we could be wrong. In fact, due to a miscalculation of the severity of the illness, if we do not act immediately, our demise is near. Will you allow me to extract the tiniest drop of your blood?" \
\
Now, science fiction is useful for rendering interesting scenarios. The question is, is Joe obligated to give his blood? There is not, I think, any conceivable benefit to Joe. The procedure will not be pleasurable; it will not increase his health (and there is some reasonable fear that it might harm him, despite the being's assurances); it will not increase Joe's wealth; it will not appreciably affect his reputation -- in fact, if he tries to *tell* anyone about the interdimensional being, he stands to lose. The *only* benefit I can imagine Joe receiving is the peace of mind, in quiet hours and in old age, that he (may have) helped a distant race of intelligent beings. And it is hard to see how what makes this peace of mind pleasant except the thought that *I feel good because I did the right thing* . It is ridiculous to suppose he thinks  *It was the right thing because it feels good.*\
\
The point is this: The norms that we ought to treat other rational agents as we (rational agents) want to be treated are just that universally-applicable and binding. Where seconds before Joe didn't know of the existence of these interdimensional beings and wouldn't have believed it if he heard of them in a story, now (through its speech and earnest plea for help) he recognizes them as, in a real sense, his brothers and fellow creatures, evolved from the same protoplasmic life in another universe or breathed into by the breath of the same God. At the same moment Joe knows that they exist, that they are rational agents, and that they need help,  at just that moment the norm springs into place and acts with full force, prohibiting, permitting, and requiring certain courses of action freely available to Joe. \
\
}