{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green26\blue26;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Naturalizing Purpose Philippe Huneman (2006)\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl322
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://83F424F9-D1EB-42EE-AF2E-C56706454866"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Huneman, Philippe. "Naturalising purpose: From comparative anatomy to the \'91adventure of reason\'92." 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 37, no. 4 (2006): 649-674.\
}}\pard\pardeftab720\sl322
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\

\b Keith\'92s Abstract: 
\b0 \
\
Huneman\'92s article discusses Kant\'92s concept of natural purpose as analyzed in the third 
\i Critique
\i0 . Organisms, Kant argued, display special features that demand a \'93special regulative teleological principle\'94 (Huneman 2006, 1). Organisms display adaptation, functionality, and conservation of forms. \
\
Kant explained all three features in terms of natural purpose. Those who followed Kant split these three features into two sub-groups. Cuvier\'92s comparative anatomy emphasized adaptation and used adaptive features to classify organisms. Goethe and Geoffrey studied the form and function of organisms in order to posit an explanation of how forms transform. \
\
Kant thought \'93general transformations in nature\'94 impossible. Goethe thought it possible only by changing the definition of explanation\'92 from \'93investigation of mechanical processes of generation\'94 to \'93the unveiling of some ideal transformations of types instantiated by those organisms.\'94\
\
E. S. Russell\'92s 
\i Form and Function 
\i0 \'93conceived the history of biology as torn between two poles: the concept of form\'85 and the concept of function\'94 (Huneman 2006, 1-2%). Anatomy studies form and physiology studies function. Cuvier followed the anatomical study of form; Geoffrey followed the physiological study of function. \
\
A response: Aristotle\'92s empirical discussion of 
\i four 
\i0 natural causes solves many otherwise intractable puzzles. If form and 
\i telos 
\i0 (something pertain to function) are both necessary causes in most natural objects and all organisms, then we simply have to study form and function, anatomy and physiology. \
\
Huneman summarizes Kant\'92s progress in this way: \'93Since his precritical texts, Kant had emphasized the need for a non-mechanistic understanding of the phenomena manifest by organized beings\'94 (3%). Kant was not satisfied by the existing mechanistic theories of Albrecht Haller and Herman Boerhaave. The mechanistic pictures may be methodologically sound assumptions, but they always ignore the \'93uniqueness of the organic realm\'94 (3).  \
\
Kant\'92s third 
\i Critique 
\i0 gives an account of purposiveness. Purpose was, in Kant\'92s earlier biological and philosophical works, an irreducible feature of biological organisms that could not be accounted for in purely mechanistic terms (Huneman 3). This account Huneman summarizes by discussing Kant\'92s account of races. \
\
Racial generation was a mechanistic process emerging from epigenetic dispositions of an organism. \'93Germs\'94 were hypothesized to explain sameness and difference in organisms. A germ was a \'93preformationist\'92 have that is already stamped upon a zygote. This concept was defended by Nicolas Malebranche and Gottfried Leibniz, and (in weaker form) by Charles Bonnet and Haller. Kant\'92s account stated that racial criteria are explicable in reference to internal and necessary properties (germs), but that characteristics like hair color are explicable with reference to external and contingent properties like climate and geography which manifest \'93hidden dispositions\'94  (4). Kant\'92s conception of race then appealed to germs to explain common racial characteristics across generations and across geographies and even within blended or biracial persons while appealing to the influence of climate to explain the emergence of various inactivated potentialities. \
\
In light of these reflections, what then is natural purpose? \'93A natural purpose is a peculiar kind of relationship between a whole and its parts, in which we judge (in a reflective manner) the whole to condition the form and relations of the parts\'94 (4). Artificial entities (like watches) are produced; natural entities (like eyes) produce themselves. And organisms produce their parts, constraining the \'93forms and relationships of the parts\'94 (4). Kant thought that the very notion of 
\i an organism 
\i0 presupposes that we judge the whole to be a cause of its parts. Kant did not think that this transcendental (that is, inevitable) presupposition reflects the metaphysical facts, just that it reflects a necessary feature of our cognition. We can \'93conceive of this causation but we cannot really know it\'94 (5). To put the point polemically, Kant is a radically anti-scientific skeptic. He has given up on biological explanations 
\i of organisms 
\i0 in favor of psychological explanations 
\i of our cognitions. \
\

\i0 I take a different tack. Since I and my intended audience consists of scientific realists, I would posit the following hypothesis: If a judgment that P is transcendental (that is, if it is impossible 
\i not 
\i0 to judge that P), then P is true (that is, P is made true by the facts). It is impossible not to judge that organisms cause the formation and relation of their parts. Therefore, organisms cause the formation and relation of their parts. \
\
Regardless, Kant\'92s account of the development of embryos affirmed that the \'93disposition and germs proper to a species are basically already present at the beginning of embryogenesis, and their relationship with the environment provides the guidelines for the embryogenic process\'94 (6%). Species do not spontaneously emerge, nor are the dispositions and germs \'93mechanically caused.\'94 Epigeneticist \'93implied the denial of two epistemological boundaries: the boundary 
\i between organized and unorganized beings; 
\i0 and the 
\i boundary between species. 
\i0 Without a boundary between species, there would be \'93systematic order of nature.\'94\
\

\b Cuvier
\b0 \
Georges Cuvier followed Kant. An organism, for Cuvier, is an organized whole that causes its parts to be formed and related just so. Comparative anatomy studies form and function of animal \'93machines\'94 and the relations between form, function, and organs. ALl possible \'93combinations of organs\'85 are submitted to the \'91principle of the conditions of existence\'92, which Cuvier added is \'91vulgarly called principle of the final causes\'92. According to this principle, \'91all the organs concur to a common purpose; hence, the alterations of one of them produce an influence over all the others\'92\'94 (11). Carnivores need teeth to catch prey, alert eyes to see well, and so on. Cuvier\'92s insistance of final causality was regulative and epistemological rather than substantive and metaphysical. One must presuppose not that \'93animals are built to reach a goal, but rather \'85 [that] the parts are linked and the functions to which they contribute co-ordinate themselves\'94 (11). The form of the animal, the whole, causes its parts to be generated and related just so not through mechanistic (efficient) causation but formal causation. For Cuvier, organic matter \'93is organized from the beginning\'94 and so he rejected spontaneous generation. Species are fixed, and adaptation to environmental milieu accounts for changes within species but not for species transformations. \
\

\b Kant\

\b0 Kant recognized the stunning archetypes discernible through comparative biological study. The \'93archeology of nature\'85reinforces our suspicion\'94 that the diversity of species are related as to a common \'93original mother\'94 (14). \
\
But mechanistic causes are still not sufficient to explain how the earth produced purposive forms in the first place. \
\
Also, experience and empirical knowledge know only of generation of a species from that same species. The \'93more radical archeology, one advocating the transformation of another species, is not 
\i empirically 
\i0 plausible. Transformations is transcendentally possible but deprived of any empirical evidence\'94 (16). \
\
The concept of \'93natural purposes\'94 arises with organized matter. We might say: final causes arise with formal causes. \
\

\b Goethe\

\b0 Goethe, according to Hunemann, made it his project to undertake the \'93adventure of reason\'94 that Kant closed off. }