{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{diamond\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u9670 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 What is virtue ethics?
\b0 \
Virtue theory is hard to characterize. What distinguishes it from deontology and utilitarianism, its major theoretical rivals? Invoking a distinction from Roger Crisp, Brown distinguishes between virtue ethics (which prescribes advocates virtues) and virtue theory (which engages in virtue talk). \
\
\

\b Stephen Brown\'92s answer
\b0 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9670 
\f0 	}Not "emphasis", since utilitarians and deontologists can emphasize virtues (Brown 2008, 12).\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9670 
\f0 	}Rather "the difference between these three views lies in the different reasons a proponent would provide to explain why the virtues are good to have... how the virtue are justified... how their goodness is explained" (Brown 2008, 12)\
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9670 
\f0 	}A virtue theory is on in which "as Statman puts it, 'the basic judgements in ethics are judgements about character'" or ones in which "the concept of a virtue offers the most useful *criterion* for the rightness of an act." \
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9670 
\f0 	}Aristotle's virtue theory argues that a good human life is by definition the exercise of virtues, implying that virtues are not only worth having but the only goods worth having. \
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9670 
\f0 	}Brown's virtue theory is "moderate" in that virtues are not "theoretically fundamental" but "ethically fundamental" (15). \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://42D2648F-C099-4B81-8B5C-4610B854C78E"}}{\fldrslt Brown's rivals are not other ethical naturalisms but non-naturalists and non-cognitivists. He hopes to beat them in overall plausibility -- reading 'plausibility' as having an account that "accords with our pretheoretic ideas and intuitions about the ethical phenomena in question" (16). \
}}\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://E703B52A-A355-47F5-80D7-FEA3EDB02B51"}}{\fldrslt 
\b \cf0 Minimal Virtue Ethics (Neo-Aristotelian)\
}}
\b \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 My hypothesis is that virtue ethics demands a teleological view of nature. Naturalism\'92s strength is that it is flexible enough to adapt to cataclysmic new discoveries. Naturalism\'92s danger is that it is too strong, invincible, non-falsifiable. 
\b \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
Maximal Virtue Ethics (Aristotle) \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93The idea that there is a human telos carries with it its own problems. Most obviously, it has at least so far proven impossible to unite all people behind a particular idea of what that telos is, or to demonstrate how we can be sure that a telos even exists. Often, the idea that nature or the gods want people to pursue certain goals and behave in certain ways has been used as a pretext for human tyranny. Many would point to the Taliban in Afghanistan, or the Catholic Inquisition, as an example of this. Also, there have been historical eras in which people in different societies strongly believed that there was a telos, but disagreed about what it was (in fact, the era of the 
\i polis
\i0  in Greece was one such era). This has often led to war. The liberal idea of religious toleration, based on the idea that the proper work of government is the protection of people's bodies and property rather than their soul (see Locke's 
\i Letter Concerning Toleration
\i0 ), was in part the result of the religious wars, which were in part about the best life for human beings, that ravaged Europe for centuries (and ravage other parts of the world today). MacIntyre points out, however, that just because we haven't reached agreement on this subject doesn't mean that we can't, and he argues that the belief that we can't is a historically specific belief, rather than an objective and permanent truth about how the world works. If we reason correctly, and examine competing philosophical traditions of moral enquiry, we can choose the most accurate one. (This is the task of 
\i Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry
\i0 ).\'94 
\f2\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Ted Clayton, "Political Philosophy of Alasdair MacIntyre," 
\i Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. \

\f2\i0\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \
Clayton mentions four objections to the idea of telos. \
1. Agreement about whether a telos exists, and if so what it is, has not yet been reached. \
2. The notion that a telos exists in nature or by a god's beck has been used by tyrants, religious fanatics. \
3. Different historical times, places, and peoples have disagreed about what the telos is. }