{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 The Grounding of Morality in the Nature of Human Practice\

\b0 \
Kant grounded morality in the nature of practical reason. Moore grounded  morality (especially intrinsic values) in the sui generis nature of morality. Both hoped to \'93free the individual to determine for her- or himself what she or he must do in a given situation, irrespective of her or his own desires\'85 to give knowledge of universal moral laws.\'94 (Lutz %) \
MacIntyre rejects these attempts as self-deceptive \'93masks for conventional morality\'94. His alternative, similar to Michael Thompson\'92s, is to ground morality in the Aristotelian account of practical reasoning by examining the very nature of practice. The phenomenological experience of practical reasoning, its inherent teleological aspect, is an end-directed activity. \
Practices are not merely individual actions, like playing the violin or sculpting with oil-based clay; practices are also social actions, like playing chess or governing a city. Practices by their very nature or essence are teleological; that is, they are done 
\i for an end. 
\i0 \
Aquinas\'92 distinction here between the 
\i action of a human 
\i0 and a 
\i human action 
\i0 is helpful. Anything you or I do is the action of a human: breathing in sleep, scratching the scalp, even wincing and dodging if someone throws you your keys. But these are not, strictly speaking, human actions since they are not the result of deliberations, are not undertaken for reasons. \
Practical reason (the faculty of reasoning practically, the sensitivity to good reasons) is different from practical 
\i reasons 
\i0 (the propositions or objects taken into consideration by the faculty). Reasons are considerations that count in favor of doing \uc0\u966  or thinking that P. Theoretical reasons count in favor of (or against) thinking that P. Example: my dad who has generally good taste in such things told me African sunsets are beautiful. That is a prima facie reason to adopt the aesthetic belief that African sunsets really are beautiful. Practical reasons count in favor of (or against) doing F. Example: I promised I would read Gary\'92s book and give comments. That is a prima facie reason to read the book and give comments. The reasons in favor of that belief and action, thus far, are defeasible. \
For MacIntyre, some preliminary observation about human practices provides us with explananda for which to account. \
\
Reasons also explain action (Davidson 1963). A question such as, \'93Why did you move out of state?\'94 is fully and satisfyingly answered by an answer position a (practical) reason, such as \'93The new job offers better pay and the city is closer to my family.\'94 \
}