{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ### The Great Platitudes\
Some ethical propositions are thought to be self-evidently true: it is good to be good. This is a tautology. And most (if not all) tautologies are trivial.  Other ethical propositions are not tautologous but are so widely and commonly accepted as to be easily mistaken for tautologies: it is good to be kind; cruelty is bad. Pleasure is good. Wise people make good leaders. I ought to keep my promises.  A just society is desirable. Fools are ridiculous and the wise are admirable. \'93Do good and avoid evil\'94 (called the first principles of practical reason). Moderation is good (called the foundation of all ethics). \'93Drunkenness\'94 or alcoholism are shameful. The Golden Rule (called the only objective rule in both religious and atheistic moralities). Injustice is bad. We ought to care for children and respect elders. Generosity is admirable. \
\
Of course, if we define \'93kindness\'94 simply as \'93a good disposition to treat others well\'94 then it appears that \'93it is good to be kind\'94 amounts to the same tautologous proposition \'93it is good to be good.\'94 But kindness is *not* best defined simply as *something good*. Kindness, it seems to me, and to many others upon reflection, is a special sort of quality we can recognize and name but not ultimately define. Cruelty, likewise, we \'93know it when we see it.\'94 There is more to our recognition of cruelty than the arbitrary application of \'93a bad disposition to hurt others.\'94 We know that children who tortures animals for fun is acting cruelly. We try to help him or her to satisfy curiosity or get parental attention through other means. We help them stop nursing a disposition to cruelty. \
\
These ethical propositions do not seem to me tautologies. Call these non-tautologous but basic ethical propositions Platitudes. Some Platitudes are small, others great. \'93It is polite to say please\'94 is a Platitude. But \'93Treat others as you would wish to be treated\'94 is a Great Platitude. \
\
Some philosophers take their task to be to debunk the Great Platitudes. They wish to explain them away, to explain *why* they are false and *how so many people fall in for them*. The platitudes are either *false* (\'93know your place\'94 taken as a justification of socio-economic or gender inequality is false) or as trivial; *of course* \'93murder is unjust\'94 is true because, \'91murder\'92 is defined as \'91unjust killing.\'92 \
\
Other philosophers take their task to be to *underwrite* the great platitudes. They wish to explain them, to explain why they are true and how it is we learn them, preserve them, and (most crucially) live well by taking them as sound practical advice. Both philosophers are sophisticated; but one is sophisticated in attacking and explaining away the Great Platitudes while the other is sophisticated in defending and explaining them. \
\
As examples of the Debunkers, consider J. L. Mackie and Alan Gibbard. Mackie claims to be running counter to the great tradition of European moral philosophy.[@mackie] Gibbard\'92s metaethical works aim to capture our common sense belief that morality is objective but without the Platonism. He says, "It might be thought ordinary conceptions of rationality Platonistic or intuitionistic. On the Platonistic Picture coma among the facts of the world are facts of what is rational and what is not. A person of normal mental powers can discern these facts. Judgments of nationality are thus straightforward apprehensions of fact, not through sense perception through a mental faculty analogous to sense perception..."[@gibbard1992wise 155]\
\
As examples of Defenders, consider G. E. Moore, Robert Adams, and Frank Jackson. Moore\'92s grandiloquent denouncements of moral philosophy are not, as one might expect, the harbingers of a revolutionary transvaluation of values; by the end of *Principia Ethica* he has given a sophisticated 300 page articulation of the yawningly common judgment that beauty, friendship, and knowledge are goods. Robert Adams\'92 metaethical work aims to capture the common sense belief that morality is objective\'85 by providing a systematic defense of Platonism. Plato sees goodness as becoming like god: \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93Fleeing [evil] is becoming like god so far as one can, and to become like god is to become just and pious with wisdom.[@plato *Statesman* 176a5-b2; @armstrong2004after] And Adams defends this resemblance relation as well. But not all Defenders are non-naturalists. Frank Jackson\'92s influential account of functionalism[@jackson1998metaphysics] aims to naturalize \'93mature folk morality\'94 without necessarily invalidating all of it. \
\
It does no good to object that the Great Platitudes are *evil* or *oppressive*, binding women to social subjugation or condemning the poor to poverty. Rather, the corrections to the errors of European (and more broadly, western) moral philosophy are contained *within the resources* of western moral philosophy. \'93Do unto others as you would have them do unto you\'94 tells more powerfully against sexism or classism than any revolutionary ideal. \
\
### Defense of the Cutting Edge, Defense of the Foundation ###\
\
It might be objected by some that ethics is (or ought to be) about controversies. We don\'92t want urgently to know about what moral terms mean, what the concept of a moral fact is, whether moral facts exist, whether virtue talk is ineliminable from ethics, what qualities count as virtues, how virtues pertain to metaphysical naturalism and all the rest. What we really want to know is whether abortion is right or wrong, and whether to legalize marijuana or euthanasia or gay marriage. And certainly such ethical matters are the more *urgent* of the two. \
\
But the foundations are more important. A society that agrees on fundamental rules can argue over the exact application of those rules in our own circumstances. But a society that disagrees on fundamentals needs to secure the fundament or risk the society collapsing. \
\
It is no good to object that discussions about virtue are base; the proper reply is that they are basic. \
}