{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf110
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### Narrative Self ###\
\
The start of MacIntyre's account is the definition of virtue strictly in terms of practices. And practices are activities individual persons undertake. But practices are themselves inherently social. They are undertaken by individuals but they are not individualistic. \
\
The second stage of the account expands its scope to include the social dimension of virtue more explicitly. Practices are already understood as social activities. Virtues sustain and eventually improve practices while vices ennervate and eventually ruin them. So virtue and vice already have a social character in the first stage. But the second stage makes the social factor more explicit and deepens it. \
\
### Enlightenment Self ### \
\
What is a human self? The Enlightenment picture of selfhood, personality, or agency is a radical divergence from the prior tradition. The Enlightenment concept is the empty self. The self is not social *by nature*; it is atomic by nature and only social by choice, or contract, or artifice. The empty self does not have a history; the body arises from a biological history but the self emerges as it were from nowhere, suddenly possessed of detached freedom. The empty self does not have a naturally-ordained destiny; it is self-determining, self-legislating, and ultimately self-creating.\
\
John Horton and Susan Mendus summarize the contrast so well I shall quote them almost in full: \
\
>Where Aristotle understood man as a creature with a definite function which he might fulfill or deny, modern morality sees man simply as a rational agent who has no true or definable purpose independent of his own will... By appealing to a telos, Aristotle was able to distinguish between the way we actually are and the way we should be. His conception of human beings as having a specific telos brought with it the possibility that we might fall short of the ideal... But with the rejection of Aristotelianism gain the rejection of any such distinction between what we are and what we should be. Post-Enlightenment man is seen as governed, not by a telos external to him, but simply by the dictates of his own inner reason... Thus the abandonment of an Aristotelian conception of the good has not only left us without standards by which to evaluate our moral arguments, it is also cast us adrift in the moral world. For Aristotle, a conception of the good for man has an essentially societal dimension.[@horton2015 6] \
\
The Enlightenment thinkers (such as Kant) and their heirs (such as John Rawls) reject inherent teleology and inherent sociality. They celebrate the empty self's elimination of these strictures as an increase in freedom. But the Enlightenment picture of the empty self is, MacIntyre thinks, disastrously wrong. The strictures do not result in increased freedom but increase in anxiety and despair. \
\
### Real Self ###\
\
The detachable empty self, divorced from past and from community is not the real self. MacIntyre here argues the standard communitarian line.[Cf. @taylor1985atomism] \
\
Three considerations are often cited as evidence of the communitarian view of the self. First is the sociological and anthropological point that each of us belongs by nature to a family (via genetics) and a culture (via upbringing). There is no Tarzan or Mowgli raised outside a culture. Rather, it is in social institutions (clubs, churches, schools, guilds, towns) that practices are learned, taught, preserved, extended. In social conditions we develop what virtues we may possess and what vices we may suffer from. We are trained in cowardice and vice by "corrupt traditions.\'94[@macintyre1984after 223] \
\
Second is the observation that *we do bear* responsibility for the actions of our ancestors. One example likely to be persuasive to modern liberal thinkers is that of transatlantic slavery. A present day black American's identity is in part defined by the relationship of 18th century blacks to 18th century whites. Similarly, present day Irishman's identity is in part defined by the relationship of 18th century Englishman to the 18th century Irish slaves. If the notion of the detachable self were true, then my personal identity would have nothing to do with the trials and triumphs of those in the past; I could justly deny any part in pre-existing structures. \
\
A discussion of teleology I defer until the next section.  \
 \
If we return to the concept of practice with the *teleological* and *social* properties firmly in mind, then MacIntyre's account becomes more clear. Farming is not a solitary and abstract activity but is always undertaken by farmers who apprenticed (under parents or mentors). Farmers who master the practice become not only beneficiaries but benefactors, and may innovate new or better ways of farming that can be passed on to the next apprentice or child. \
\
MacIntyre explains the relationship between virtue, practices, and institutions like this: \
\
>The virtues find their point and purpose not only in sustaining those relationships necessary if the variety of goods internal to practices are to be achieved and not only in sustaining the form of an individual life in which that individual may seek out his or her good as the good of his or her whole life, but also in sustaining those traditions which provide both practices and individual lives with their necessary historical context.[@macintyre1984after 223]}