{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ### Telos/eudaimonia ### \
\
So much for a summary of MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue. Some further comments are needed to fill out the relationship of virtue to eudaemonia. Talk of human nature and telos are inseparable. For MacIntyre, the loss of telos (human-nature-as-it-should-be) is one of the chief if not the chief error of Enlightenment moralities. Human-nature-as-it-is is a topic for both philosophers and social scientists: psychologists, sociologists, anthropologists, etc. But telos unifies human nature as it is with ethical principles and realistic ideals by which we can become something other than what we are at present. \'93To travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive\'94 and yet a having in mind a clear telos is a precondition for traveling hopefully. \
\
MacIntyre\'92s provisional conception of our human telos is this:  \'93The good life for man is the life spent in seeking for the good life for man, and the virtues necessary for the seeking are those which will enable us to understand what more and what else the good life for man is."[@macintyre1984after 210] Our telos is to be free to pursue our telos. MacIntyre is not a eudaemonist. At least, he is not obviously a straightforward eudaemonist; this conception of the human telos is more vague than Aristotle\'92s or Aquinas\'92s. Perhaps it is only provisional because it is so extremely indeterminate. How could it be made more determinate? The virtues needed to preserve the quest for the good, he suggests, may illumine \'93what else\'94 our telos consists in.  \
\
This essentially historicist view of human life is key to MacIntyre\'92s virtue theory. To see why, we need to think about narrative. In the minds of many contemporaries, human life is broken into isolate stages (childhood, adolescence, old age, etc.). The human self is isolated from its present community and from its position in relation to the past. By contrast, MacIntyre\'92s synoptic vision of human life is narrative.[See especially @macintyre1984after chapter 15] Human life is a unity, from birth to death (for individuals) and from emergence to dissolution (for groups and traditions). A human social group is a unity of members, more like an organism than  just an aggregate of atoms.  Narrative is not \'93disguise or decoration\'94 but an essential feature of the working of our minds and (arguably) an essential feature of the unfolding of reality through time. Narrative is not only a way of telling ourselves intelligible stories about what has happened, but is the very stuff of life. \
\
The end of our narrative (the terminus) is, of course, individual death. But narratives also have an end (goal). He says, \'93We live out our lives, both individually and in our relationships with each other, in the light of certain conception of a possible shared future, a future in which certain possibilities beckon us forward and others repel us, some seem already foreclosed and others perhaps inevitable."[@macintyre1984after 215] The unity of that narrative lies not only in our identity as a central character of our story, and our place in larger narrative contexts, but in the single telos governing all the moments of our \'93quest.\'94 Of course, quests do not always achieve their object. The narrative of human life always reaches its end (in death) but doesn\'92t always reach its end (in success, achievement of telos). But to see our whole life synoptically requires seeing it as a narrative.\
\
\
### Aristotle ###\
\
MacIntyre revisits the seminal text of the \'93Aristotelian tradition\'94: the *Nicomachean Ethics.* There we find the view that humans \'93like the members of all other species, have a specific nature; and that nature is such that they have certain aims and goals, such that they move by nature towards a specific telos. The good is defined in terms of their specific characteristics\'94.[@macintyre1984after 148] For Aristotle the virtues are \'93precisely those qualities the possession of which will enable an individual to achieve eudaemonia and the lack of which will frustrate his movement toward that telos.\'94[@macintyre1984after 148]\
\
We can see that Aristotle\'92s account includes these ingredients, all of which interlock with the others to form a coherent picture of a human being or community being excellent at life. (A) Human nature is part of nature; and for Aristotle \'93nature\'94 extends to include formal, final, material, and efficient causes. Hence our practical rationality is natural even though it is not material. Also, our end and (to some degree) the qualities that enable us to achieve that end are natural to us. (B) The virtues are those qualities that enable persons and communities to achieve their end, which is eudaemonia. (D) The telos of humanity is its (natural) final cause, its end. Eudaemonia is not pleasure, not wealth, not just wisdom, but virtuous activity.\
\
MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue is \'93neo-Aristotelian\'94 in that it borrows from but also contrast with Aristotle\'92s. (MacIntyre, for instance, denies that Aristotle\'92s virtues are so timeless, abstract, and generically human as Aristotle would make them appear; they are partly indexed to fourth century, upper-class, educated Athenian culture.) \
\
### Virtue ethicist?  ###\
\
Interestingly, though MacIntyre has contributed to contemporary virtue ethics and influenced many virtue ethicists, he denies the epithet himself because he worries that modern virtue ethics has not fully cured itself of the same assumption of teleological nihilism that plague rationalistic moralities.  \
\
Even so, MacIntyre thinks that "human beings need the virtues" because they are intrinsically good and useful for transforming communities and persons.[@macintyre1999dependent] At the practical level of daily life, a small community (such as a family or town or university) does well to organize themselves around a common vision of what is good and a common conception of what qualities will help everyone to attain that good. Even though such a common vision of and pursuit of virtue is impossible to scale up indefinitely for 300+ millions people (in the U.S., for instance), it is possible and beneficial at smaller, local scales. And indeed, this is already happening. \
\
At the theoretical level of philosophical ethics, the concepts of virtue, practical wisdom, and happiness supply for moral theory what many modern moralities have not: a clear, coherent, useful, and justifiable theory that grounds a rational pursuit of the good life and resolvable moral disagreements. \
\
MacIntyre is first and foremost a philosopher of *practical reason*. Weinstein says that the primary theme of his work has not been goodness or virtue but practical rationality itself.[@weinstein2003macintyre %%page number%%] In this he defends the assumption that morality is not a special domain of practical life but simply is the domain of *living well*.  *Whose Justice? Which Rationality?* and *Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry* take up themes about rationality per se, while *After Virtue* and *Dependent Rational Animals* follow the Aristotelian pattern of treating ethical issues as species of practical rationality. \
\
In the following sections, I will attempt to trace in more detail his account of virtue and his account of how virtue and practical rationality are partially constituted by the traditions in which we live and move and have our being. \
\
\
### Virtue and Telos/Eudaimonia\
\
With this in mind, the relation between virtue and telos comes more clearly to light. Since not only individual agents but whole communities and institutions (and the whole human race!) are aimed at a telos, the presence of virtues sustains practices and traditions. The absence of the relevant virtues \'93weakens and destroys\'94 practices and whole traditions.[@macintyre1984after 223] The absence of the higher level virtues, weakens and destroys the generically human goods: minimally, the freedom to pursue our telos. \
\
MacIntyre says: \
>The virtues therefore are to be understood as those dispositions which will not only sustain practices and enable us to achieve the goods internal to practices, but which will also sustain us in the relevant kind of quest for the good, by enabling us to overcome the charms, dangers, temptations and distractions which we encounter, and which will furnish us with increasing self-knowledge and increasing knowledge of the good.[@macintyre1984after 219] \
\
The \'93quest for the good\'94 is necessary but not sufficient. It is good, and it cannot be completed without relevant virtues. And yet there is more to the good. So that first provisional conception of telos as indeterminate may be right. For if a person or community could secure the freedom to pursue their telos, they could secures an ethical and political space within which to develop higher-order virtues. \
\
These higher-order virtues are the context for and hence limit and guide the other lower-order virtues. Still further, social and political virtues are also the context, limit, and guide to individual virtues. Social and political virtues are \'93required to sustain the kind of households and the kind of political communities in which men and women can seek for the good together and the virtues necessary for philosophical enquiry about the character of the good\'94[@macintyre1984after 219]\
\
Hence, MacIntyre is not a eudaimonist. At least, he is not obviously a straightforward eudaimonist. He seems to be saying that our telos is to be free to pursue our telos. But this is not quite correct. He concludes that the human telos (whatever it might robustly turn out to be) includes minimally the freedom to explore "what else" the telos might be. It is not vacuous to conclude that the virtues needed to achieve this (extremely indeterminate) goal themselves indirectly make room for and might directly illumine \'93what else\'94 our telos consists in. It may turn out (and his later writings are more explicit about it) that the determinate telos of a given tradition is a more determinate conception of eudaemonia. \
\
##### Primary Virtue Objection\
\
A preliminary objection amounts to an interpretive challenge. It simply asks: Which of MacIntyre\'92s concepts of \'92virtue\'92 is the primary sense of virtue? Aristotle\'92s conception of virtue is that virtues are acquired human qualities (habits) that contribute to (and are at least partially constitutive of) eudaemonia. Those qualities that contribute to the good internal to a practice are certainly skills, \'93know-how\'94, technical knowledge or what have you. But not all practices contribute to human flourishing.  Grand theft, torture, etc., are contrary to other virtues (respect for private property, kindness). Other practices can be plausibly seen as value-neutral (table tennis?). Therefore, not all MacIntyrean virtues qualify as Aristotelian virtues, in the sense that many assume virtues are beneficial to their possessor. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ##### Primary Virtue Objection Reply\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Which of MacIntyre\'92s concepts of virtue is the primary sense? I would disagree that virtues enable an agent to achieve the goods internal to any individual practice (like chess-playing). Those qualities are akin to virtues but not virtues except in a derivative, analogous sense. If I were to emphasize their difference from virtues in the primary sense, I would simply call them individual skills; if I were to emphasize their commonalities, I would call them virtue-skills.  Skills are \'91acquired human characteristics\'92 that share certain features with virtues: they are habitual, learned, and can contribute to an agent\'92s character. But they are only derivative in that they contribute to goods of this or that particular practice rather than of the general project of living flourishing human lives. MacIntyre seems to concede this distinction when he concedes that some practices might be oriented toward wicked ends. So virtue-skills are not, by definition, traits that benefit their possessor. \
\
The second layer of virtue is a skill that emerges within social practices. Skills related to political activity is an example. These skills are not even conceivably individualistic; they are always performed by people with other people within a community. And yet this layer or dimension is not, I would argue, the primary sense of \'91virtue.\'92 The reason is that communities can be corrupt. An entire social group can engage in a social practice that is itself vicious, that is antithetical to human flourishing. The social practice of trading slaves might be an example. A community composed of members who each have the skill of performing that activity in such a way as to achieve the goods internal to slave-trading would seem to count as \'93virtuous\'94 by MacIntyre\'92s loose standard, but this feels forced. The intension of the term \'91virtue\'92 is partly, by definition, good activities (meaning good for creatures like us). \
\
So it seems to me important that, for some (such as Aristotle), only MacIntyre\'92s third layer or dimension of virtue is properly so called. Virtues that contribute to the goods internal to the \'93practice\'94 of human life as a whole. We must conceive of human life as a narrative unity, with beginning (birth and childhood) middle (maturity and adulthood) and end (decrepitude and death). Those qualities such as courage, moderation, kindness, generosity, affability and so on that contribute to success qua human flourishing are properly virtues. They help us to flourish, they are necessary conditions of a flourishing human person and community. \
\
So if only this third dimension of the MacIntyre\'92s concept of virtue deserves the unqualified epithet \'91virtue,\'92 and if that concept was already explicated in detail by Aristotle, then is MacIntyre\'92s painstaking construction of a three-layered account pointless? There is a point of importance to be extracted, I think. That important point can only be seen if one builds up to the concept of virtue from (potentially value-neutral) individual practices or skills to (potentially value-neutral) social practices.\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 #### The Concept of Virtue\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
We gain insight into MacIntyre\'92s philosophical methodology by reflecting on how he defines virtue. His account is historical but not historicist; it aims for universality but is not purely abstract conceptual analysis. It is, in a word, traditional. MacIntyre\'92s definition emerges from history but is not restricted to its history; he does not vow to conserve. Yet it does not appear \'93out of heaven\'94, unprecedented, unpredicted, unaccountable, and ready-made. \
\
There are two ways to disagree with MacIntyre\'92s definition of virtue. The first is to deny its historical roots. This critic is obliged to enter into the historical analysis and interpretation. The other is to grant the historical roots and deny }