{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 6. **Justification of Morality Objection.**
\b0  I am indebted to @dandrea2006tradition for his illuminating explication and discussion of this objection, which he points out that Philippa Foot (inter alia) levels against MacIntyre: after all the informative and wide-ranging historical analysis, MacIntyre\'92s account does not solve the \'93problem posed by Plato, and never solved \'85 that of showing the rationality, for any man, of a thorough-going acceptance of the restraints of justice.\'94[@foot1981] This is the \'93problem of immoralism\'94 she tries to address in the final chapter of her *Natural Goodness*, which I shall discuss in a later chapter.\
\
#### Will I discuss it in a later chapter? If not remove that sentence.  ###\
\
The challenge of a Nietzsche or Callicles or Thrasymachus lies in their acceptance that the good life for humans *requires* some virtues or requires virtue in some sense but their rejection of the \'93robust concept of justice with its corresponding constraints on action.\'94[@dandrea2006tradition 430]\
\
One response is that the \'93why be moral?\'94 question is never asked in the abstract. The person who succeeds in sincerely asking it, if that person is not a hypothetical thought experiment in a piece of philosophical writing, then that person is by definition an outcast from their own society. The emergence of the doubt as to whether one should be moral, and the crystallization of the doubt into an articulate challenge, is *a political failure*. The polis to which the moral skeptic belongs has failed him. The moral skeptic, likewise, has failed the polis which belongs to him. Parents, teachers, religious leaders, politicians, businesses, and non-profit organizations all have a hand in giving each member of the community the tradition out of which the community arises and within which abstract philosophical or pseudo-philosophical worries such as \'93What does it all mean?\'94 simply do not arise. \
}