{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## Why virtue ethics? ##\
\
My approach to philosophical ethics is to study virtue ethicists and to explore virtue and related concepts like practical reason and happiness. \
\
A reasonable preliminary question I should address is this: Why write about virtue? Why study virtue ethicists? I have two answers: one sociological, the other personal. \
\
The sociological answer first: In the last 60 years or so, \'93virtue ethics\'94 broadly construed has garnered the support of a remarkably high percentage of analytic philosophers.[@chalmers2014philosophers. This survey shows that roughly the same amount of analytic philosophers adhere to "virtue ethics" as adhere to deontology (about 1/5th).] \
\
There are various interpretations of this revival. One is that many philosophers have become profoundly dissatisfied with modern moral philosophy. (Alasdair MacIntyre represents this view.) On this reading, Aristotle and Confucius provide refreshing alternatives to the stolid, dry, rationalism of Kant or Mill.\
\
But one of our most prestigious living virtue ethicists, Rosalind Hursthouse, disputes this interpretation. Virtue ethics presented itself as a rival during the early fledgling efforts to win a place at the table of modern moral philosophy; now that it *has* a place, such a presentation is needlessly combative. Her alternative interpretation is lent support by the acquisition (or re-acquisition) of virtue talk in other modern moral philosophies. Julia Driver, Ben Bradley and others have been working to articulate a theory they call \'93virtue consequentialism\'94 or \'93character consequentialism\'94. In contrast to \'93act\'94 or \'93rule\'94 utilitarianisms, virtue consequentialism describes virtues as those traits whose possessors tend to bring about the most desirable consequences. \
\
A second interpretation of the surprising renaissance of virtue ethics is that virtue concepts are potent and flexible. That is, virtue concepts can be systematized into coherent, stable, theories of their own. But they can also can enrich deontological and utilitarian and contractarian theories.  In fact, they can even help non-philosophers (such as college undergraduate) to avoid damaging vices and live well. The question "How do I live well? What is a beautiful life for me?" is, arguably, not an optional one but an inescapable question that arises for every person that survives to adulthood. \
\
My own view is that both of these interpretations of the revival of contemporary virtue ethics capture an important truth. On the one hand, those who study virtue ethics can indeed achieve an excellent position from which to critique modern moral philosophy. Long familiarity with cultures, places, and times different from one's own has the salubrious effect of opening one's eyes to one's own culture and time. The philosopher conversant with Aristotle or Aquinas likely to notice and articulate modern assumptions or biases that are invisible to those of us who live in modernity. \
\
At the same time, it is not a foregone conclusion that contemporary virtue ethicist will *reject* widespread modern assumptions. Some, such as Murdoch and MacIntyre, did become staunch opponents of modernity. Some, such as McDowell and Hursthouse, become staunch defenders, even while working to enrich modernity with pre-modern tradition. \
\
Throughout these investigations, I consider both possibilities. By taking a broader historical perspective, some virtue ethicists find in ancient and medieval philosophers a refreshing relief from the hidebound modern assumptions; others find in them an invigorating resource for advancing progress upon modern assumptions.\
\
The personal answer: Although I was raised in a household of strict morals, it was not until I was introduced (in undergraduate days) to the concept of virtue as a live and practical moral concept. What struck me then, as now, was the connection between virtue and *eudaimonia*, between goodness and happiness, between the individual's good and the public good, between the flourishing of one person and the thriving of the community. Human beings are not (like ants) parts of a collective, beholden to the hive for food and safety; nor are human beings (like Homer's Cyclops) *radically individual* loners, isolated from all neighbors. Rather, in the famous words of St. Paul, "we, being many, are one body... and every one members one of another" (Rom 12.5). The crucial metaphor that illuminates morality is not the legal but the organic. Virtue concepts are organic. They are often praised (and *criticized*) for being "uncodifiable\'94.[See @mcdowell1979virtue for a discussion of the \'93uncodifiability\'94 nature of deductive *and* practical reason, which discussion owes much to Wittgenstein.] Virtue concepts are practical, flexible, sometimes fuzzy -- just like every other useful concept. Since being introduced to the older tradition of living virtuously in order to thrive and be happy, and since introducing others likewise, these concepts and the tradition they enrich has come to seem as natural as breathing and as necessary.}