{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### Not \'93naturalistic\'94\
\
Many have complained that Foot\'92s neo-Aristotelian \'93naturalism\'94 does not amount to a naturalistic 
\fs24 theory. They object that Foot is not a "naturalist." \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\'93\'85we can see that Foot\'92s naturalism offers a fresh approach to objectivism in ethics. Yet, in spite of such attractions, *Natural Goodness* is in the midst of a cool reception. Here, I will argue that this reception is due to the fact that Foot\'92s naturalism draws on a picture of the biological world that is at odds with the view embraced by most contemporary scientists and philosophers. Foot\'92s readers commonly assume that the account of the biological world that she must want to adhere to, and that she nevertheless mistakenly departs from, is the account offered by contemporary neo-Darwinian biological sciences.\'94[@hacker2009natural 309]\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\fs28 \cf0 \
### Reply -- misunderstanding\

\fs24 \
This is to misunderstand Foot and to beg the question as to what nature is. \

\fs28 \
### Naturalism is a useless word\
\
It is becoming more plain to anyone who reads the latest literature on "naturalism" that accusations from one philosopher to another that a theory fails to be "naturalistic" are vacuous. \
\
The noun 'Naturalism,' like the adjective, 'natural', is a cognate of 'nature.' Naturalism is an 'ism' attached to the most ambiguous word in our language: nature. But what is 'nature'? To say that various thinkers and various schools of thought defend non-identical definitions of nature would be an understatement. Various thinkers defend incompatible definitions. \
\
There are, by my count, no less than sixteen substantive philosophical positions that fly under the heading of 'naturalism', and they couldn't be more different: from Paul and Patricia Churchland's monistic physicalism, to John McDowell's "relaxed naturalism", to William James' neutral monism, to Thomas Aquinas' natural law theory, to Stoic pantheism, and more. Is there any question that these views are not just different but incompatible?  \
\
Consider an example to see how the competing understandings of nature render discussion about whether "x is really naturalistic" almost meaningless. \
\
Suppose Bob thinks 'nature' is simply another word for the concept of 'all that which is', all of reality, being. Nature is everything. His colleague Bettie thinks 'nature' is a word that picks out something special, namely that part of 'all that is' that is cosmic, that part of reality that constitutes *this* world. For Bob, nature is being. For Bettie, nature is part of being. \
\
In a discussion one day, Bob says, "You know, Bettie, I attended a lecture on angels yesterday. Being a naturalist, I was interested in the nature of angels. I believe some real beings are not physical beings but intellectual or spiritual beings -- but what is their nature? The lecturer argued that they are intellectual substances or disembodied minds. I found that compelling." Bettie replies,  "I certainly agree that some real beings are not physical beings but intellectual or spiritual beings. But being a naturalist, I would not say angels have a 'nature' or any 'natural properties' since they are not physical. Rather, angels have an essence." \
\
Is there any question that a hard-nosed physicalist such as Frank Jackson or Alan Gibbard would have an aneurysm listening to this conversation? \
\
Their colleague, Charlie, agrees with Bob in thinking 'nature' is simply another word for the concept of 'all that which is', all of reality, being -- but he is a materialist.[^20] Naturally enough, he thinks "because I am a naturalist, I do not think angels are real beings and part of the global world order, since they are not physical. I probably would not attend a lecture on angels in the first place." Charlie might look cross-eyed at Bob and Bettie during their exchange; Bob and Bettie might look cross-eyed at him back. \
\
Bob accuses Charlie of being a non-naturalist. Why? Because Charlie denies part of reality. A true naturalist accepts all of reality, whether material or not. Charlie is a dogmatist about denying fairies, demons, gods, angels, ghosts, and any other purported being that has the gall not to be material; Bob is more ecumenical and can examine the evidence for each purported being as it comes. \
\
[^20]: I say "materialist" and not "physicalist" because "physis" is Greek for "nature" and so the problem iterates.\
\
The point of these dialogues is this: The title 'naturalist' can, without contradiction, be claimed by Bob, Bettie, and Charlie. Each with a straight face owns the title, defends it against rivals, and criticizes the silly notions of their colleagues as "non-naturalistic." Bob is a non-naturalist to Bettie and Charlie because he thinks immaterial angels are part of nature, are members of the natural order. Bettie is a non-naturalist to Charlie because she thinks that angels exist above and beyond the material order. Charlie is a a non-naturalist to Bob because Charlie does not accept *all* of nature. \
\
This problem is iterative. It does no good to call Charlie a "physicalist" -- the term "physis" means "nature" so 'physicalist' is a Greek language version of the Latin language 'naturalist.' The question is whether angels have a *physis*. \
\
If the label is universally applicable, it is useless in the attempt to construct clear arguments with clear propositions. If it is useless for such purposes, it is *a fortiriori* pointless to use the term as an epithet of praise or blame. Yet despite this general conceptual anarchy, some philosophers emit the accusation of 'naturalism' or 'non-naturalism' as if uttering a curse. They seem to believe the sheer force of being called a naturalist or non-naturalist will melt their opponent's resolve and refute their position.\
\
I should say that among the crew of naturalists like myself, it is perfectly well to point out that "that fellow over there is not a naturalist like us" -- as long as we can recognize that that fellow and his crew are pointing to me and saying "that fellow over there is not a naturalist like us." Our disagreement is real. But it is over what 'nature' consists in and not whether some view ought to be taxonomized in philosophy encyclopedias as a 'naturalistic' view or not. I cannot imagine any philosophical view whatsoever -- pansychism, Parmenidean monism, nihilism -- that cannot be presented (without contradiction) as a variety of naturalism. \
\
So what question should we ask about view X? We should ask what *kind* of naturalism X is. But this is the same as asking whether it is true or false. And that is a worthwhile question. \
\
### Fink on Nature\
\
How many competing notions of nature are there? Roughly three that are important for philosphical purposes. \
\
Nature is all that is. }