{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##McDowell's critique of empirical ethics in bald naturalism\
The critique we find in McDowell is the "just too different" point. Bald naturalism, as a realm of unbroken and perhaps unbreakable law, is just too different from the space of reasons. \
\
McDowell agrees about Foot's rejection of supernaturalism and of naturalistic subjectivism. [@mcdowell.mvr]\
\
\
\
#John McDowell\'92s View from Somewhere, and Intersubjective Norms of Reason and Practical Reason\
\
##Introduction\
\
Richard Bernstein calls John McDowell\'92s naturalism a much needed \'93novel twist\'94 on the stalemate between those who think naturalism will eventually make good on its promise to naturalize reason and those who are sick of waiting and ready to give up. \
\
He quotes Joseph Margolis and Mark Gottlieb as saying that: \
\
> Naturalism in the current analytic sense may well be the dominant programmatic orientation of Anglo-American philosophy. It may be characterized as an informally linked family of doctrines and strategies broadly in accord with 'ancestral' themes of W. V. O. Quine's "Epistemology Naturalized." The original themes feature in Quine include: a preference for physicalism of one sort or another, a strong emphasis on the continuity of science and philosophy, particularly at the explanatory level, and the effective replacement of legitimative inquiries of a typically noncausal sort by causal inquiries centering on belief." (Berstein 58) \
\
The "specter of Kant keeps surfacing in thinkers like Putnam and Habermas who are convinced that reason cannot be naturalized" (Berstein 59). The "novel twist" comes from John McDowell. Berstein says that \'93at first glance, it seems that McDowell fits right into the tradition of Kantian anti-naturalism \'97 a tradition that runs from Kant right up to Putnam and Habermas\'94 since he thinks \'93reason can\'92t be naturalized\'94 (Bernstein 62). But his arguments, Berstein thinks, against bald naturalism amount to some sophisticated question-begging via sleight of hand. Even so, when we look at particular \'93first order claims\
\
\
##John McDowell\
\
###Mind and World\
The \'93oscillation\'94 between two false and fearful alternatives is the backdrop against which McDowell\'92s unique beliefs about mind and world come to light. \
\
\
John McDowell shares with Thomas Nagel a radical lack of curiosity about the metaphysics \'97 that is, the traditional metaphysics \'97 of morality. As a type of Kantian, he doesn\'92t think such answers are possible to find and so such questions not much worth asking. \
Second nature is the key concept for John McDowell. Second nature is that realm of human intersubjectivity wherein we are sensitive to reasons (that is, reasons for thinking and reasons for acting). Bald nature is not sensitive to reasons. Supernature, hypothetically, would be but is not natural and so is spooky. \
\
}