{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## Aristotelian Nature Telos Chapter \
Discussions of putatively "Aristotelian" or neo-Aristotelian elynchthics self-consciously import some Aristotelian metaphysics. But how much? The linchpin is Aristotle's notion of telos.\
\
Aristotle's metaphysics can be characterized around a few broad themes: \
1. Form and matter;\
2. Actuality and potentiality;\
3. Causation: final, formal, efficient, and material; \
4. Substance and nine types of property; \
\
Of course, his epistemology cottons on to his metaphysics. To know X is to actualize the mind with respect to the form of X; to know X is to be informed by X. Knowledge is the telos of intellect or %\uc0\u957 \u959 \u965 \u962 . The intellect that is being actualized by the actualities/forms of objects in the world is itself an object of the world. The intellect being actualized is fulfilling its nature (its form). Fulfilling a nature means realizing a telos inherent or coordinate with the form. \
\
### Telos\
\
Some philosophers talk of telos as if it were a separable portion of Aristotle's unified metaphysics. I am not so sure.  [^5]\
\
[^5]: I am thinking of people like Canadian metaphysician Kathrin Koslicki who said during the Q&A of a talk that telos had been "surgically removed" from her hylomorphic metaphysics. "A Hylomorphic Analysis of Concrete Particular Objects" But surgical removal of an essential organ kills the patient. \
\
Metaphysically, the reason telos is the linchpin is that without telos, formal structure does not exhaustively account for an organism. A very old book on biology argues that biologists are often split between form based and function based biologies, between anatomy or physiology [@russell1916]. For Aristotle, such debates are needless. Formal cause and final cause together (with material and efficient of course) constitute an organism's true identity. \
\
Epistemically, knowing the form of x without knowing the telos of x is a good start but only part of the way to knowledge of x.}