{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 On the Concept of Nature\

\b0 John Dewey described himself as a naturalist. I am not sure what he meant by this self-ascription. I am not sure anyone else is sure. What does the term naturalist mean? \
\
Those who hope for any help from etymology will be disappointed. The word nature comes to us from Latin natura. The Greek correlate is physis, which means roughly \'93that which grows\'94.  
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 % Homer\'92s Odyssey says \'93
\f2 \uc0\u8035 
\f0 \uc0\u962  
\f2 \uc0\u7940 
\f0 \uc0\u961 \u945  \u966 \u969 \u957 \u942 \u963 \u945 \u962  \u960 \u972 \u961 \u949  \u966 \u940 \u961 \u956 \u945 \u954 \u959 \u957  
\f2 \uc0\u7936 
\f0 \uc0\u961 \u947 \u949 \u970 \u966 \u972 \u957 \u964 \u951 \u962  
\f2 \uc0\u7952 
\f0 \uc0\u954  \u947 \u945 \u943 \u951 \u962  
\f2 \uc0\u7952 
\f0 \uc0\u961 \u973 \u963 \u945 \u962 , \u954 \u945 \u943  \u956 \u959 \u953 \u966 \u973 \u963 \u953 \u957  \u945 
\f2 \uc0\u8016 
\f0 \uc0\u964 \u959 
\f2 \uc0\u8166 
\f0  
\f2 \uc0\u7956 
\f0 \uc0\u948 \u949 \u953 \u958 \u949 .\'94 (So saying, Argeiphontes [=Hermes] gave me the herb, drawing it from the ground, and showed me its nature.) 
\i Odyssey
\i0  10.302-3 (ed. A.T. Murray).
\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \
\
Aristotle distinguishes nature from art by nature having in itself the source of motion while art has its source of motion from without. The Oxford English Dictionary lists a bafflingly wide range of entries on the term nature.  The major supergroups are senses relating either to \'93bodily strength\'94 or \'93mental or physical impulses\'94 or \'93innate character.\'94 Examples include sexual urges of an animal, the character of a human, essential qualities of anything, including God. A sermon from 17th century preacher Robert South on Job urges that \'93God would not act sutably, and congruously, to the Equity and Goodness of his Nature, if He should not reward it.\'94   (OED)  
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 %\'94nature, n.". OED Online. December 2014. Oxford University Press. http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/125353?isAdvanced=false&result=1&rskey=TLHvuY& (accessed March 06, 2015). \

\f1\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \
John McDowell describes himself as a naturalist by which he means to avoid the \'93fear of supernaturalism\'94[% @mcdowell.mw 84] \
\
McDowell would find it strange to hear from Reverend South a discussion of the nature of God called a naturalistic discussion, but it is hard to see how McDowell or anyone can block such usages of the term except by excluding them by definition.\
\
###
\b A quick example of non-overlapping sets of definitions for overlapping sets of terms
\b0 \
Keywords: Nature, Practical Reason, Human, Science, Goodness. Humans are part of nature, and so is goodness, and it can be known by science.\
\
Compare these two statements: \
\
1. Humans are merely wetware meat machines, and goodness is whatever property conduces to our biological flourishing and genotype reproductive success, and such properties can be discovered, categorized, and exhaustively researched by physical, biological, psychological, and sociological sciences.\
\
OR\
\
2. Humans are one of the entities in existence, and so is the form of good, which can be known, and goodness is whatever participates in the Good, which for us is the flourishing of our rational nature, which can be known and taught through tradition, including metaphysics, psychology, ethical inquiry, revelation, and experience.\
\
Both deploy the keywords above systematically. But the interlocking system of meanings of each term individually together in these sentences is different. The metaethical frameworks deploying these keywords might seem incommensurable. I don't think they are. Two consistent systems can be judged relative to eachother by picking out one or two particular claims each makes and discerning which seems most likely to be true. The "winner" of that judgment points us to the system in which it is embedded. \
\
\
##
\b Democritus and Lucretius
\b0 \
While this dissertation\'92s main interlocutors are contemporary, it helps to include some older friends and foes in the conversation. Considering the historical context of a debate is often useful, sometimes irrelevant, but never harmful. However abstract, timeless, and almost mathematical the arguments for and against a proposition, it sometimes helps to know who has defended and attacked it before, how they have done so, and what other truth-claims and behavioral maxims are organically related to that proposition. \
\
For this reason, I begin my literature review not with G. E. Moore but with Democritus. \
\
The theorizing of Democritus is important for my purposes in two ways: his end (continuity) and his means (matter). (1) He desired an account that afforded radical continuity of explanation. And (2) his account found that continuity in material objects. \
\
##Lucretius\
Lucretius puts the lie to the whole notion that modern materialism, or contemporary physicalism, is a recent discovery and a sort of philosophical upshot of the modern scientific revolution.}