{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 The primary thesis I am defending is that norms are real features of reality on par with and radically continuous with other real things, be they abstract (natural laws) or concrete objects of various kinds (trees, stars, and mollusks). Knowledge of these norms may be difficult or may be easy. Some cases I have offered for consideration are exceedingly easy for normal rational agents. These I have called 'primary norms.' Primary norms include norms like *it is good to be rational* and *love one another* and *life is good*.  \
\
The question of 'naturalism' I have tried to show is hopelessly vague. The question of 'naturalism' is not, however, meaningless. Teasing out the concerns of naturalists and non-naturalists we discover three clear questions: \
\
1. Is all that is real physical/material? \
2. Is all that is real real? \
3. Is all that is real divine? \
\
The second question is just the tautology 'what is real is real' phrased as a question. As such, the answer is Yes. \
\
1. Is all that is real physical/material? \
2. Is all that is real real? \
3. Is all that is real divine? \
\
My answers to these shall be: \
\
1. Is all that is real physical/material? No. \
2. Is all that is real real? Yes. \
3. Is all that is real divine? Not necessarily. \
\
\
## 1. Is all that is real physical/material? Physicalism? \
\
But the question of the reality of x has become for us embroiled in the question of the *physicality* of x. \
\
The question "is x real?" has often become for many analytic philosophers "is x natural?". I concede to the equivalence. The question "is x natural?" has become for many "is x physical/material?" Since physics as a discipline is undergoing such an overhaul, questions about whether x is physical should be deferred to a distant and uncertain future. But we know what matter is by ostensive definition: "the stuff my computer is made of." I shall take matter, not physical stuff, to be the more basic notion, and even the more scientific and respectable notion.  \
\
The equivalence between reality and nature and between nature (phusis) and matter is, for those who are puzzled by such metaethical questions, the source of the puzzlement. \
\
In regards to the above list of explananda, we listed some diversities that seem different. \
\
The problem of the one and the many, as it pertains to metaethics, is this: what if anything unifies all the varieties of value we both *recognize* and *live by*?  \
\
This is what I mean by saying that we are looking for *radical continuity*: what root unifies or might unify these diversities? They are unified in our language and in our thought. Are they really unified in themselves?\
\
There seems to be one kind of goodness distributed across many different but ultimately related kinds. The good of intellect and the good of will are unified, for us humans, in goodness. But the good of beauty, excellence, moral virtue, order, and being itself are not obviously or easily reducible to human goods of intellect and will. I argue that they are not easily reducible because they are not in fact reducible at all. \
\
For the physicalist, there is no option but to so reduce them. What unifies human goods is just that they contribute to human welfare. Human welfare we must read as a particular configuration of matter (perhaps my and everyone else's brain states being thus-and-so). What unifies all non-human goods is humanity: that is, what all putatively "non-human goods" have in common is that evaluations of them appear in human discourse. \
\
This is all very misguided. But the problem is the means. The end is correct, however misguided the means. The goal of unification is one we deeply desire and preverbially yearn for. We all want a  satisfying account, a way to understand the whole world a global and radical continuity. We all want to understand the world and our place in it, if there is such a place to be understood. \
\
The way back on track, then, is to suspend belief in physicalism for now, to suspend the way we use the terms 'nature' and 'science,' and stick to a discussion of normativity in light of a broad and plausible metaphysical framework. \
\
That framework is a faith in the fundamental proposition that reality is intelligible and hence some (though not all) of our theorizing about reality stops no shorter than reality itself. \
\
I find it telling that some critiques of my thesis have not said "You are wrong" but "there is no possible answer to your questions because reality is unknowable". The person who tells me I am wrong still believes in truth. The person who tells me reality is unknowable has given up on the inquiry. They are not part of my conversation. If they are right, then by their own lights, my theory of reality is just as fantastic as theirs. They ought not go around criticizing other people's fantasies on the basis of their own fantasy. But if, as I think, a bad theory is not fantasy but falsehood, then a good theory is not pleasing fantasy but truth, they ought to correct both themselves and me. \
\
That is, the moral nihilist predicates her moral theory on metaphysical nihilism or skepticism. I predicate my metaphysical realism on moral realism. Since I know it to be good to help starving children, to train my natural children, to be faithful to my friends, to be gentle and kind to my wife, therefore I know knowledge of reality is possible. There are many moral truths, lamentably many, important ones, that I know I am ignorant of. But not these. These are non-negotiable. Openness with respect to the badness of cruelty is a base, dangerous, and noxious openness. Openness with respect to these true ethical judgments would be just as bad as being closed with respect to negotiable ethical judgments like that felons should not vote or that divorce should be illegal. The question is not "is it good to be open-minded or close-minded?" but "about what should one be close-minded? what open-minded?"\
}