{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1

\f0\i\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
How Successful is Naturalism?\
\
\

\i0 The essay from Nancy Murphy is especially helpful. It applies the MacIntyrian notion of tradition to theism and naturalism. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl320\sa240

\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
"How successful is naturalism"\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl320\sa240

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Two camps
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Naturalism is no single entity. But its many forms can be grouped under two primary camps. Those\'a0two camps that have been variously described.\'a0\
These pair are characterized in different ways:\
"strict" and "liberal" naturalism.(Goetz, Taliaffero,\'a0Naturalism)\
"bald" and "relaxed"\'a0naturalism (McDowell,\'a0Mind and World, 89)\
"hard" and "soft"\'a0naturalism (Gerhard Vollmer,\'a0"Can Everything Be Rationally Explained Everywhere in the World?" in\'a0How Successful is Naturalism?)\
"reductive" and "non-reductive"\'a0naturalism ("How successful is naturalism?")\
"reductive materialism" and "evolutionary naturalism" (Sellars, "Why naturalism and not materialism")\
"Unrestricted" and "restricted" naturalism (Fink, "Three Sorts of Naturalism" in John McDowell: Experience, Norm, and Nature, Jakob Lindgaar, ed.)\

\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
What distinguishes the two?
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
The first camp is essentially a form of reductive\'a0physicalism, the descendent of the older materialism.\
The second camp is a non-reductive physicalism, the descendent (arguably) of older theories like Stoicism, Aristotelianism, nominalism, naturalized platonism.\
The first claims that it is currently able\'a0or one day will\'a0be able to reduce all branches of knowledge to physics, all branches of ontology to physicalist metaphysics, and all human psychology\'a0phenomena to neurophysiological phenomena. This claims that "second nature" (humanity) is just a part of "primary nature", the spatio-temporal manifold.\'a0\
Everything can be described from the third person perspective.\'a0\
The second claims that the things of "the human spirit," first-person consciousness, rationality, morality, and so on must not be reduced in our scientific picture of the world. "Second nature" is part of nature but is not merely a segment of the\'a0spatio-temporal manifold. Humanity and all that is human\'a0cannot be described exhaustively\'a0from the third-person perspective, but must be described in part from the first-person perspective.\'a0\

\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
What unites the two?
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Why are both of these widely diverging schools of thought called naturalism? There seems to be a sociological contributing cause: naturalism is a positive word for us. All who want respect and esteem scramble to lay claim to their membership in the naturalists club. But it can't be all that. There is also a rejection of the supernatural. So is naturalism just atheism? If so, why develop a different name for atheism? Is 'naturalism' just a way for atheists to say I "I don't believe in God but I do believe in everything else."\'a0\

\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Other classifications?
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Hard naturalism is sometimes equated with scientism, both by those who accept the label and those who do not. (Rosenburg,\'a0Atheist's Guide to Reality)\'a0\
Sometimes so-called hard naturalism just claims that unqualified title. (Drees). Sometimes so-called soft naturalism just claims the unqualified\'a0title of "naturalism" (Sellars).\'a0\
Within the restricted form of naturalism, sometimes a distinction is drawn between idealism and supernaturalism. (Fink 2009; Sellars 1927).\
\

\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
What is naturalism? What is at stake?
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Sellars says,\'a0\
"Let its concentrate now upon the differences between naturalism and materialism. It may be that we can find a clue in the distinction between cosmology and ontology. I would say that ontology is the more specialized of these two divisions of theory of reality or metaphysics. Materialism is distinctly an ontological theory, a theory of the\'a0stuff\'a0of reality. Its polar opposite is usually taken to be mentalism of some kind. Naturalism, on the other hand, is a cosmological position; its opposite is supernaturalism in the larger meaning of that term. I mean that naturalism takes nature in a definite way as identical with reality, as self\uc0\u8209 sufficient and as the whole of reality. And by nature is meant the spaaaaaace\u8209 time\u8209 causal system which is studied by science and in which our lives are passed. The whole nature of nature may not be exhaustively known, but its location and general characteristics come tinder the above categories. Supernaturalism essentially affirms that nature is only a part of reality. This supernaturalism may be of the myth\u8209 believing, popular type bound up with traditional religion or it may be quite opposed to the miraculous. For instance, nature is for Bradley only a part of reality and in that sense it is appearance. The status of matter for Plato is another instance of supernaturalism in this large sense." Roy Sellars, "Naturalism and Not Materialism.\'94\'a0\
\
}