{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 These considerations are not decisive; they are not meant to be so. As Boyd points out, the relative merits of the metaphysical accounts behind Boyd (atheism) and Adams (theism) will change the background plausibility of the metaethical accounts. But also, might not the sword cut the other way? Perhaps we should say that the relative merits of our metaethical account will modify the plausibility of our metaphysical theory, be it theistic or atheistic. Our metaethical account examines our ethical stance, after all, a stance which is as close to us as our very hearts. Our examinations of theism and atheism are liable to be aiming at a putative reality foreign and far outside us. \
\
Nagel's general direction -- start with defeasible morally realist presumptions and build from there to metaphysics and epistemology -- is right. I am more certain that I ought to care for my children and respect my parents than I am convinced all the world is not exhaustively material nor all the world just my perceptions of an unknowable ideas. \
\
Regardless, our sensitivity to both the \'93progress\'94 of new truths in natural scientific inquiry and the (relative) stability of at least some truths of ethical inquiry can better explain the reality of goodness, our epistemic access to it, and our successful deployment of ethical terms, points to a framework more like Adams\'92, where the good itself is transcendent and yet many (and very different) kinds of things can be good by relation to it. The philosophical naturalist who refuses \'97 rightly so, I think \'97 to retreat to moral antirealism has a tough road ahead. He must fully articulate a plausible framework either that accounts for more natural kinds of goodness, or for other kinds of goodness that are not immediately like natural kinds. But much more so, he must fill in the details of real, natural goodness.}