{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs32 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
MacIntyre begins Chapter 3 by identifying characteristics shared by both the encyclopaedic and genealogical modes in order to distinguish them from this third alternative. Both of the former modes see a unified history in philosophy from Socrates to the post-Kantians. From this it follows that both frame the question about the proper mode of moral enquiry in the form of an exclusive and exhaustive disjunction: either reason is detached from every particular tradition, or it is the instrument of a will to power (59). However, MacIntyre identifies a third possibility: perhaps rational enquiry 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
requires
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 that one participate in \'93a particular type of moral community\'94 (60). Far from compromising rationality\'92s access to truth, MacIntyre suggests that participation in a tradition of moral practice and enquiry is a necessary condition for the right appropriation of rationality.\
\
On MacIntyre\'92s view, then, moral inquiry is an ongoing conversation between conflicting approaches. Present debates grow out of reflection on the questions and answers offered by the best thinkers of the past.\
\
\
\
\
(1) the lack of any generally accepted starting point for enquiry, (2) the lack of any generally accepted ranking in weight and importance of reasons for holding particular beliefs, and (3) the lack of resources provided by mere logical analysis for reasoning about the justification of substantive beliefs. Furthermore, these same three problems plague the larger world of contemporary philosophy such that only incommensurability seems able to explain the irreconcilable division and interminable disagreement. And where there is only incommensurability, it is difficult to see how there can be a history of rational progress.\
\
\
\
MacIntyre claims that morality in Gifford\'92s culture was marked by five characteristics. First, morality was a distinct and relatively autonomous area of beliefs, attitudes, and rule following activity, ordered in accord with a scheme of rigid compartmentalization of life. Second, morality was primarily a matter of rule following and responding to rule breaking in ritualized ways. Third, the rules of morality were chiefly negative prohibitions. Fourth, strong impropriety attached to breaking the compartmentalization of social life: it was important to know which conversation to have with whom, and manners, clothing, euphemism and circumlocution safeguarded these practices. Fifth, morality was widely agreed to enjoin a certain set of actions and prohibitions, but, despite confidence that morality was somehow justifiable, there was large disagreement as to how it was actually justified.\
\
Morality in 19
\fs22 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\super th
\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub  century Victorian England was\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	\'95	}Autonomous discipline of rule following\
{\listtext	\'95	}About rule-following and rule-breaking\
{\listtext	\'95	}Chiefly negative rules, prohibitions\
{\listtext	\'95	}Lacking social skills was immoral\
{\listtext	\'95	}\'93Everyone knows\'94 that \'93morality\'94 demands some actions and forbids others\
{\listtext	\'95	}No one knows how \'93morality\'94 is justified\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
}