{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green26\blue26;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs38 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
One core element in Boyd\'92s theory is an externalist semantics for moral terms, modeled on the Kripke/Putnam account of natural kind terms. (For an independent development of this idea, see Brink 2001.) On Boyd\'92s (1988) view, moral terms refer to the properties that causally regulate our use of them in such a way that more of our judgments using them become true over time. The increasing conformity in  judgment between people over time indicates that our judgments are approximately correct judgments about those properties.\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa256

\f1\fs26 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Thanks for this article, Tim.\'a0\
I notice Dowell doesn't mention Hursthouse, McDowell, Foot, et. al. Perhaps rightly so -- they espouse a very different kind of ethical naturalism.\'a0Even Hursthouse admits that \'93proponents of neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism\'85 are\'85 unlike other proponents of ethical naturalism and they occupy such an unfamiliar position in philosophy\'85\'94 [footnote 1: See below for full quote]\uc0\u8232 \
The goal all these proponents pursue, and the one I am pursuing, is that of grounding ethical facts in facts about\'a0
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
human nature 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
(Brown 2009, 9)
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
.
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'a0Other naturalists tend to try to ground ethical facts in facts about non-human nature. This is a difference. But is the neo-Aristotelian strategy an advantage or disadvantage? Dowell doesn't seem to consider that question. \'a0\
In the discussion of ostensive definitions of the property of being natural, she says this:\'a0
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
"In the case of the ostensive definition, it seems open to the non-naturalist to hold that human beings are paradigmatically natural objects and that some of them instantiate the (sui generis, non-natural) properties of goodness and badness (see Copp 2003: 183 for a similar suggestion). In the case of the deferential method, there seems to be no guarantee that paradigmatically non-natural properties will not be among the properties natural scientists will one day in fact posit."
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
I'm not sure why the parenthetical caveat that if human beings instantiate the property of goodness or badness then they must instantiate\'a0
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
non-natural property
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'a0of goodness and badness. Such a caveat seems to exclude by assumption the possibility that human beings can or do instantiate natural properties (like kin protection) that are also normative or evaluative properties. It excludes the possibility of "natural goodness." And natural goodness is just what Foot and Hursthouse defend: Some facts are natural facts and normative or evaluative facts.\'a0\
Now, certainly we neo-Aristotelians are up to something different.\'a0 Jackson, Boyd, et al., are trying to ground ethical facts in non-human nature. Admittedly, grounding ethical facts in 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
nature 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
by way of
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
human nature 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
is a different kind of naturalism. But it is still a form of naturalism. We might say it is a rival form of naturalism 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
according to a rival conception of 'naturalism
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
.' Rehg and Davis allege that this project is too "neo-Kantian" to be naturalistic (Rehg and Davis 2003). I intend to address those criticisms eventually.[footnote 2] But merely citing the difference between two conceptions of naturalism doesn't settle which is more adquate. It might be that our neo-Aristotelian naturalism highlights shortcomings in other kinds of naturalism, rather\'a0than vice versa.\'a0\
\
\
\
It was a good article, and such things are helping me to define and distinguish my project from other projects on offer.\
\uc0\u8232 \
KEDB\
\uc0\u8232 \
[1] The abstract for a Hursthouse (2013) says:
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'a0 "The proponents of neo-Aristotelian ethical naturalism (henceforth \'93Aristotelian naturalism\'94 for short) include Foot (2001), Geach (1956, 1977), Hursthouse (1999), McDowell (1995), MacIntyre (1999), Nussbaum (1993, 1995), and Thompson (1995); and also Anscombe because her work has influenced so many others. (Gaut [1997, 2002] should also be known as a significant contributor.) 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Their views are so unlike those of other proponents of ethical naturalism (see\'a0Naturalism, Ethical), and they occupy such an unfamiliar position in philosophy, that they are simultaneously criticized on at least two quite different bases
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Some say they are not trying to offer naturalism at all, because they avowedly employ a moralized conception of human nature; some say they are trying to offer naturalism insofar as they offer a biological foundation for ethics, but that either this has counterintuitive upshots or the biology is Aristotle's and thereby pre-Darwinian and not a proper naturalistic foundation at all."
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\uc0\u8232 \

\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
[2] 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
For instance, one difference between let's call it 'third-person perspective naturalism' and 'first-person perspective naturalism' is that the perspective we take on non-human nature is different from that we take on rocks and plants. We\'a0
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
are
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 humans so in our investigations of human nature, we unavoidably and beneficially adopt a given (first-person) perspective, rather than attempting the same neutral third-person perspective we adopt toward (say) geological and biological facts. But the notion that adopting a first-person perspective is necessary for doing ethical research does not defy naturalism. It only defies the notion that a naturalistic theory must restrict itself exclusively to a third-person perspective on human nature. I think we have good reason to think such restrictions mistaken. \
}