{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\i\fs28 \cf0 Motivating 
\i0 reasons are different from 
\i justifying 
\i0 reasons. But on the reasons externalist view I shall adopt, sometimes justifying reasons motivate. For example, suppose Charlie is offered by a long-time business colleague the opportunity to join an inside trade and make a clean hundred thousand dollars virtually overnight. He is given all assurances that the deal will appear above board and all the other investors involved are confident that the risk of getting caught is negligible. In desperate need of money, Charlie is severely tempted. Nevertheless, his judgment that the law against inside trading is a just one, and that the habit of  law-abiding a worthwhile and admirable trait to develop and maintain, 
\i justifies 
\i0 his decision not to make the inside trade. It also 
\i motivates 
\i0 him to avoid the deal (and sever his business ties with his colleague). \
Not all motivating reasons are justifying reasons. Charlie might be 
\i motivated 
\i0 by the consideration that $100,000 would make a dramatic positive difference to his debt situation, to his children\'92s college fund, to his wife\'92s Christmas present, to his next family vacation. But he is not 
\i justified 
\i0 in acting on those reasons \'97 as in this case he is well aware. \
}