{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf110
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## Section 1: The Tradition of Virtue and Practical Rationality ##\
\
\
### MacIntyre\'92s Project: An Invitation to Restore Virtue ###\
\
Perhaps the core of MacIntyre's ethical writings has been the invitation to restore Aristotelian and Thomistic tradition of virtue.  MacIntyre extends this invitation to academics and to regular folks; to individuals and to communities. He says that he writes to "small farmers, fishermen (and women), schoolteachers who refuse to become bureaucratic functionaries, those who retain ideals of craftsmanship in manual or mental labor and members of cooperatives aimed at remedying hunger or homelessness."[@weinstein2003macintyre 8.]\
\
MacIntyre's influence has been remarkable. Many have taken the invitation. Sympathizers tend to be dissatisfied with the present modern culture of "emotivism" or moral nihilism. In such a culture, unmoored from its deeper past, shrill and intractable moral disagreement reign, and the only means of resolving disagreement is not rational appeal but moral manipulation. In such a culture, life has no apparent objective purpose and each individual has no ready-made identity out of which to discover a purpose. In the seventeenth century, such a culture was billed as a radical improvement on the older Aristotelian tradition. Liberal Enlightenment thinkers promoted a purely formal, disengaged freedom as a superior replacement to any more narrow, substantive goods that were thought to constitute human happiness and to unify political and social groups around a common goal.  \
\
Non-sympathizers who decline the invitation to recover the virtues fall into one of two broad groups: the first (which MacIntyre calls \'93encyclopedists\'94) tend to be more or less satisfied with the theory and practice of our present modern culture; the second  (\'93genealogists\'94) agree with some of MacIntyre\'92s diagnoses but reject his prognoses. \
\
Encyclopedists might think that one or another moral theory \'97 Kantianism, consequentialism, contractarianism, Humean sentimentalism, egoism (or even a particularly modern sort of virtue theory)  \'97 is substantially on the right track. They might think such a theory, albeit imperfect, needs minor corrections but not a major overhaul. Encyclopedists tend to find MacIntyre's criticisms excessively polemical and his solutions needlessly radical. \
\
Genealogists think that Kantianism, utilitarianism, divine command theory, *and* virtue theory are *all* false. They are *all* just masks worn by contemporary prejudices. They often commit to immoralism, amoralism, error theory,[@joyce2013irrealism],  philosophical irony about morality (as well as metaphysics).  \
\
The invitation to recover the virtues of the tradition of Aristotle (and Aquinas and others) is not a demand -- it really is an *invitation.* Readers who are discontent with modern culture and morality may well find MacIntyre's solutions compelling. Readers who are not so discontent may find something of interest in his criticisms; if not, they are invited to consider his solutions in a spirit of philosophical imagination. "*If* modern morality were a disaster... would this be a good solution?"\
}