{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### Main question\
This chapter focuses on MacIntyre\'92s \'93*After Virtue* Project\'94. The governing questions are these: What is MacIntyre's account of virtue? What is MacIntyre\'92s ethical project? What are the primary objections to his ethical project or its account of virtue? And how plausible is his account of virtue, after these objections have been taken seriously?\
\
As I shall treat MacIntyre, his central ethical insights are twofold: First, that Enlightenment, modern morality got off track by exorcizing telos from morality. Intelligible, rational, socially-applicable Aristotelian morality includes human nature as it is, human-nature-as-it-could-be-if-its-telos, and practical morality which facilitates the transformation from the former to the latter. This surgical removal is unjustified and disastrous. \
\
Secondly, the restoration of telos into morality restores moral intelligibility, not to mention social order. The fundamental objection his critics have had is to query: How can telos be restored? How can virtues which are only intelligible in light of teleology be restored if telos can\'92t be? Either through metaphysical biology or the metaphysics of *practice*. Call the first natural teleology and the second \'93social teleology.\'94 Telos must be natural, real, and non-imaginary. Telos is even \'93scientific\'94 (contra Jean Hampton) if we include the social, biological, and computational sciences as \'91sciences\'92. Social teleology which is rooted in the metaphysics of action satisfies these criteria. Biological or natural teleology (to say nothing of cosmic teleology) satisfies these criteria too, but we shall examine that prospect in the upcoming chapter. MacIntyre takes the latter course.\
\pard\tx560\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
	In order to make clear MacIntyre\'92s central claim \'97 that social teleology underwrites virtue and makes morality intelligible, useful, and rational \'97 we must explore his broader project and examine some of his central topics, such as *practice, life, and tradition-bound rationality.*}