{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf110
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### Origin of the Virtue Tradition in Aristotle ### \
\
MacIntyre revisits the seminal text of the \'93Aristotelian tradition\'94: the *Nicomachean Ethics.* There we find the view that humans \'93like the members of all other species, have a specific nature; and that nature is such that they have certain aims and goals, such that they move by nature towards a specific telos. The good is defined in terms of their specific characteristics\'94.[@macintyre1984after 148] For Aristotle the virtues are \'93precisely those qualities the possession of which will enable an individual to achieve eudaimonia and the lack of which will frustrate his movement toward that telos.\'94[@macintyre1984after 148]\
\
We can see that Aristotle\'92s account includes these ingredients, all of which interlock with the others to form a coherent picture of a human being or community being excellent at life. (A) Human nature is part of nature; and for Aristotle \'93nature\'94 extends to include formal, final, material, and efficient causes. Hence our practical rationality is natural even though it is not material. Also, our end and (to some degree) the qualities that enable us to achieve that end are natural to us. (B) The virtues are those qualities that enable persons and communities to achieve their end, which is eudaimonia. (D) The telos of humanity is its (natural) final cause, its end. Eudaimonia is not pleasure, not wealth, not just wisdom, but virtuous activity.\
\
MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue is \'93neo-Aristotelian\'94 in that it borrows from but also contrast with Aristotle\'92s. (MacIntyre, for instance, denies that Aristotle\'92s virtues are so timeless, abstract, and generically human as Aristotle would make them appear; they are partly indexed to fourth century, upper-class, educated Athenian culture.)}