{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red20\green20\blue20;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## Philosophical Ethics\
\
\
### How do we live well? \
\
How do we live well? This is the first question of life that human beings, upon arriving at the age of reflection, ask. It is also the first question of ethical philosophers. \
\
Ethics is the discipline of practical reason. There are \'91right answers\'92 in ethics since there are right ways to live one\'92s life, there are wells to live well and ways to live poorly; things can go well or badly for us. One of the fundamental governing assumptions of this work is that there is no special domain of the moral. Value theory is a whole package. There is at bottom no intelligible distinction between morality and prudence. Morality is not a special domain of practical reason but is the whole domain of practical reason. \
\
How did this broad sense of morality as living life excellently narrow? \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ### How did the meaning of \'91morality\'92 narrow? \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Practicality as a whole domain was sub-divided. \
\
First, it meant any particular way of life \'97 something like idiosyncrasy, habit, character. Second, any practical lesson \'97 something like the \'93moral of the story\'94, the point, that to be acted on, the rule, the maxim. Third, a domain of rules of conduct that are \'93neither theological nor legal nor aesthetic\'94[@macintyre1984 39]\
\
The conventional distinction that \'93morality\'94 is a special sub-division pertaining to right and wrong behavior toward others traces to the 1700s, where \'93immorality\'94 meant sexual misbehavior.  The conventional separation of \'93moral\'94 from \'93non-moral\'94 considerations traces to John Stuart Mill who divided the former domain as concerned with duties to benefit and to not harm others. \
\
\
\
### Ethics, Morals and Practical Reason\
\
The word \'93ethical\'94 is sometimes taken to have a broader connotation than the narrow \'93moral,\'94 but I think such distinctions etymologically suspect. As MacIntyre summarizes: \'93\'91moral\'92 is the etymological descendant of \'91moralis\'92. But \'91moralis\'92, like its Greek predecessor 
\i ethikos \'97 
\i0 I invented \'91moralis\'92 to translate the Greek word in the 
\i De Fato
\i0  
\i \'97 
\i0 means \'91pertaining to character\'92 where a man\'92s character is nothing other than his set dispositions to behave systematically in one way rather than another, to lead on particular kind of life.\'94[@Macintyre1984after 38] The early uses of Moral did not contrast with \'93\'91prudential\'92 or \'91self interested\'92\'94 nor with \'93\'91legal or \'91religious\'92\'94. MacIntyre concludes: \'93The word to which it is closest in meaning is perhaps most simply \'91practical\'92.\'94\
\
In the older, broader (and I think more sensible) sense of the term, it would not sound like nonsense to assert that, say, driving on the right side of the road in the US is the moral thing to do \'97 it is a more, a custom. And following the customs and mores of a culture is 
\i *the thing to do*. 
\i0 \
\
As one MacIntyre scholar puts it: \'91The term practical rationality is derived from Aristotle\'92s *
\i phronesis*
\i0 . It is to be distinguished from 
\i *sophia*, 
\i0 a more technical form of reasoning. Practical rationality leads to more approximate conclusions; it takes context and relative facts into account, and it usually leads to moral or political conclusions.\'94[@weinstein2003macintyre 60-61] 
\i \

\i0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Rosalind Hursthouse likewise says that: \'93The concept of a virtue is the concept of something that makes its possessor good: a virtuous person is a morally good, excellent or admirable person who acts and feels well, rightly, as she should. These are commonly accepted truisms.\'94[@sepvirtue] \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
There is more to being an admirable person than *avoiding* transgressions. Admirable people command our respect for their brains, their guts, their strength, their rare talents, their outstanding achievements, their unimaginable creativity, their wit and eloquence. In a word, we admire *what they do* with *what they are given*. \
\
When we moderns confusedly think of \'93morality\'94 we are really thinking only that part of morality pertaining to non-maleficence, or avoiding the harm of others. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
### Three Dimensions of Practical Reason\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
Now, the domain of non-maleficence is a real domain. Duties and obligations pertaining to others is a legitimate division. But the division is not between morality and non-morality but between different types of morality or sub-domains. I shall call this domain \'932
\fs18 \super nd
\fs28 \nosupersub -personal morality\'94, that is, my duties to *
\i you* 
\i0 or to *
\i you all*.
\i0  This domain is vast. But there are *other* domains for the 1
\fs18 \super st
\fs28 \nosupersub -person and 3
\fs18 \super rd
\fs28 \nosupersub -person. \
\
The entire set is the domain of practicality \'97 what one *
\i ought to do* 
\i0 or ought to think, say, etc. The three sub-domains are defined by the object with regard to which one ought to do and not do this or that. \
\
The domain of 1
\fs18 \super st
\fs28 \nosupersub -person morality is proper respect and care for one\'92s self \'97 self-love or enlightened self-interest. (This is what Mill called the domain of \'93prudence\'94 and sharply distinguishes from \'93morality.\'94) It includes the virtues that benefit both oneself and others (moderation and courage) but especially practical wisdom, without which none of the other virtues do me much good. \
\
The domain of *3
\fs18 \super rd
\fs28 \nosupersub -person morality* is a bit harder to articulate. It is proper respect and care for everything that is not *you or me.* That could include animals and plants, pets and work animals, our possessions, our earth and environment, and perhaps even our solar system. The primary virtue of this domain is justice, a respect for the whole and the proper arrangement of all the parts. If God exists, then 3
\fs18 \super rd
\fs28 \nosupersub -personal morality would require piety to him or her, since on most theisms God is not strictly speaking \'93one of us\'94 and so the appropriate responses or behaviors (allegiance, sacrifice, or what have you) are of a different order from self-regarding and other-regarding virtues. \
\
The domain of 2
\fs18 \super nd
\fs28 \nosupersub -person morality, I said, is vast. It includes interpersonal moral obligations, values, and virtues as well as broader social or political ones. I suggest that the dominant virtue
\i  
\i0 here is not only justice but love \'97 i.e., a strong regard for the other, a charitable orientation to promoting the good of others, refusing to harm them, and committing to protect them from harm. But we shall return to these themes. \
\
For now, I only want to make it clear the distinction between "morality" (qua the value of nonmaleficience and perhaps benevolence) and morality (qua the value of doing good and avoiding *all* kinds of evil, of discovering and executing *"the thing to do"*). \
\
### Consequences\
\
What hangs on this distinction? Many things. I\'92ll give a couple of examples. \
\
#### Internalism/Externalism\
\
The internalism/externalism debate within metaethics is in part about whether moral facts are objectively prescriptive.[@smith2007externalist 233] Smith distinguishes two facets to this question: first, is the concept of a moral fact simply the concept of an objectively prescriptive and *motivating* feature of the world? Mackie, and Smith, think Yes. Second, do any such moral facts obtain? Mackie thinks no, Smith thinks yes. \
\
While Mackie would deny that there are any such *moral* facts, it would be much harder for him to deny objectively prescriptive epistemic facts, or prudential facts. To deny that there is ever a *thing to do* is to commit oneself to explaining *all* action and *all* deliberation in other terms. When we deliberate about what to do, we are *only* deliberating about what we wish would come true, what we want, what we prefer, what we desire, etc. We are not trying to figure out *what is the best course of action*. \
\
Smith discusses the amoralist challenge in David Brink\'92s work[@smith2007externalist 234] The amoralist Brink (and others) imagine is aware of moral demands \'93yet remains unmoved\'94. But we cannot simply let this example into play without scrutiny. My worry about the example is that the amoralist here is that although the amoralist is not moved or claims not to be moved by \'93moral\'94 considerations he is obviously motivated by something; he has practical reason \'97 the ability to act on reasons, to behave this way and not that way on purpose, the ability to undertake projects, and so on. The amoralist needs more detail. Is he an egoist? If so, then he denies that nonmaleficence is an objective value and affirms *only* autonomy or prudence is an objective value. The egoist is regularly immoral (by our standards) but not because he denies objectively prescriptive features of the world across the board but because he thinks only the pursuit of *his* good is worth the effort. \
\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ### Defense?
\b0 \
I believe this fundamental assumption of mine is defensible. But it is not defensible a part from the details of the metaethical virtue theory I am trying to work out in the remainder of the book. That is, the critic who arrives at the conclusion of the book and objects to that conclusion may either object to one or more particular chapter or particular claim, or else she may object that such governing assumptions themselves have lead us astray. \
\
The only defense I will offer now is not so much a defense but a strategic rhetorical reversal of the burden of proof. It is this: why assume that there is a special domain of the moral? The ancient and medieval philosophers in the west thought of the domain of practical reason as a natural unit: all that is voluntary or under our control may be done well or badly. Our goal in living well is to to identify what to think, what to do, and what to make. As a corollary, we must identify what 
\i not 
\i0 to think, what 
\i not 
\i0 to do, and what 
\i not 
\i0 to make. But shrinking the whole domain of practical reason down to the domain of a few absolute prohibitions on harming others is a modern innovation. If it is right, then it is a modern invention. If it is wrong, it is a modern ignorance. Either way, its proponent needs, I think, to offer some account of why such a shrinking amounts to progress rather than regress in moral theorizing. \
\
}