{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf110
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### Practice ###\
\
MacIntyre's 'practice' is a term of art. A practice is a social activity aimed at defined ends.  Each practice has a history, a set of practitioners, a common set of standards, and a common goal. MacIntyre mentions chess, farming, political activity, and several others as examples. Let\'92s look more closely at farming. Farming is a social activity undertaken let's say for the sake of producing sufficient quantities of edible food for the farmer, the farmer's family, and the general marketplace. (This example is not intended to be controversial \'97 please overlook any factual mistakes on the details.) Farming as a practice has a history or series of cultural histories, a set of farmers who belong to it or practice it, and a common set of standards that define good and bad farming.  \
\
A practice may be understood not as a mere action (like scratching an itch) but an intelligible set of actions embedded in a social context and organized around a particular goal. Farming is not just one action, but an intelligible set of actions (tilling, sowing, watering, protecting, harvesting, storing, etc.). \
\
The goods "internal" to farming are just those that necessarily constitute the practice as it is: the production of good food, edible food, nutritious food, etc. (Of course, not all farmers produce comestibles, but I am speaking generally.) Goods "external" to farming are those that might result from the practice but are not necessary parts: fame, fortune, good friends, physical fitness. Virtues relative to the practice of farming include strength, dexterity with equipment, sensitivity to service animals, etc. Without these, the goods internal to farming are unachievable. \
\
Another and perhaps more clear example is one MacIntyre favors: political activity. Political activity can be undertaken by agents motivated to achieve goods internal or external to the practice. That is, some people engage in political activity *in order to bring about* the health, securing, and flourishing of the polis. But others (we need not speculate how many) engage in order to achieve \'93external\'94 (unessential) goods such as satisfying their own ambition, achieving fame and power, or securing  book deals. Effectiveness in attaining these external goods does not constitute virtue. In fact, the desire to pursue external goods in the course of engaging in a practice is not just any old sort of desire \'97 it is a *temptation.* Virtues are needed to overcome those temptations and to succeed at political activity, judging \'93success\'94 only by the standards defined within practice itself. \
\
Virtue defined by practice, then, is already importantly contrasted against mere *human happiness* or *pleasure* as found in Mill, and against mere *duty* or *good will* as found in Kant. The standards by which farmers judge each other are not static and universal laws but immanent and flexible standards. The internal goal of farming is the production of edible food, and its practitioners qua farmers are committed to this goal without any eye toward the broader question of farming\'92s place in the broader social order. A farmer may attend conferences about the future of his field, but he does not do so in his strict role as farmer, but in his role as citizen or businessman. \
\
Even so, MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue eventually transcends this notion of practice. At least it transcends the narrowest definition of practice. His account of virtue includes three layers or dimensions: individual skill (like farming), social activity (like statesmanship), and human activity (like practical reasoning about how to live well). But it is essential to grasp the first layer. \
\
Lutz summarizes MacIntyre\'92s famous passage on virtue in this way: a practice is \'93(1) a complex social activity that (2) enables participants to gain goods internal to the practice. (3) Participants achieve excellence in practices by gaining the internal goods. When participants achieve excellence, (4) the social understandings of excellence in the practice, of the goods of the practice, and of the possibility of achieving excellence in the practice are systematically extended.\'94[@lutz2015]}