{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 ### Objections ###\
\
#### Primary Virtue Objection\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
First, an objection that amounts to an interpretive challenge. It simply asks: Which of MacIntyre\'92s concepts of \'92virtue\'92 is the primary sense of virtue? Aristotle\'92s conception of virtue is that virtues are acquired human qualities (habits) that contribute to (and are at least partially constitutive of) eudaemonia. Those qualities that contribute to the good internal to a practice are certainly skills, \'93know-how\'94, technical knowledge or what have you. But not all practices contribute to human flourishing.  Grand theft, torture, etc., are contrary to other virtues (respect for private property, kindness). Other practices can be plausibly seen as value-neutral (table tennis?). Therefore, not all MacIntyrean virtues qualify as Aristotelian virtues, in the sense that many assume virtues are beneficial to their possessor. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 #### Primary Virtue Objection Reply\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Which of MacIntyre\'92s concepts of virtue is the primary sense? I would disagree that virtues enable an agent to achieve the goods internal to any individual practice (like chess-playing). Those qualities are akin to virtues but not virtues except in a derivative, analogous sense. If I were to emphasize their difference from virtues in the primary sense, I would simply call them individual skills; if I were to emphasize their commonalities, I would call them virtue-skills.  Skills are \'91acquired human characteristics\'92 that share certain features with virtues: they are habitual, learned, and can contribute to an agent\'92s character. But they are only derivative in that they contribute to goods of this or that particular practice rather than of the general project of living flourishing human lives. MacIntyre seems to concede this distinction when he concedes that some practices might be oriented toward wicked ends. So virtue-skills are not, by definition, traits that benefit their possessor. \
\
The second layer of virtue is a skill that emerges within social practices. Skills related to political activity is an example. These skills are not even conceivably individualistic; they are always performed by people with other people within a community. And yet this layer or dimension is not, I would argue, the primary sense of \'91virtue.\'92 The reason is that communities can be corrupt. An entire social group can engage in a social practice that is itself vicious, that is antithetical to human flourishing. The social practice of trading slaves might be an example. A community composed of members who each have the skill of performing that activity in such a way as to achieve the goods internal to slave-trading would seem to count as \'93virtuous\'94 by MacIntyre\'92s loose standard, but this feels forced. The intension of the term \'91virtue\'92 is partly, by definition, good activities (meaning good for creatures like us). \
\
So it seems to me important that only MacIntyre\'92s third layer or dimension of virtue is properly so called. Virtues that contribute to the goods internal to the \'93practice\'94 of human life as a whole. We must conceive of human life as a narrative unity, with beginning (birth and childhood) middle (maturity and adulthood) and end (decrepitude and death). Those qualities such as courage, moderation, kindness, generosity, affability and so on that contribute to success qua human flourishing are properly virtues. They help us to flourish, they are necessary conditions of a flourishing human person and community. Of course, this is the sense of the term \'91virtue\'92 that Aristotle gave millennia ago. \
\
So if only this third dimension of the MacIntyre\'92s concept of virtue deserves the unqualified epithet \'91virtue,\'92 and if that concept was already explicated in detail by Aristotle, then is MacIntyre\'92s painstaking construction of a three-layered account pointless? There is a point of importance to be extracted, I think. That important point can only be seen if one builds up to the concept of virtue from (potentially value-neutral) individual practices or skills to (potentially value-neutral) social practices.}