{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## What is virtue? \
\
She begins with necessary conditions: A virtue^[She recommends examining Aristotle and Aquinas (and others) for their view on virtue, but cautions against terminological misunderstandings. *Arete* for them refers \'93also to arts, and even to excellences of the speculative intellect whose domain is theory rather than practice\'94 (@foot2002virtues 2). *Arete ethikai* (or virtues morales) do not correspond to our moral virtues. For us, there are four moral virtues: courage, temperance, wisdom, and justice. For them, wisdom or *phronesis/prudentia* is an intellectual virtue.] is beneficial. She says, \'93Human beings do not get on well without them. Nobody can get on well if he lacks courage, and does not have some measure of temperance and wisdom, while communities where justice and charity re lacking are apt to be wretched places to live, as Russia was under the Stalinist terror.\'94[@foot2002virtues 2-3] But whom is benefited? Does a person possessing a virtue benefit the virtuous person or the society in which the virtuous person lives? For some virtues, the answer is more clearly \'93both\'94: temperance benefits oneself and one\'92s family or community. For other virtues, such as justice or charity, the answer is less clear. \'93It is a reasonable opinion that on the whole a man is better off for being charitable and just, but this is not to say that circumstances may not arise in which he will have to sacrifice everything for charity or justice.\'94[@foot2002virtues 3]\
\
> \cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Let us say then, leaving unsolved problems behind us, that virtues are in general beneficial characteristics, and indeed ones that a human being needs to have, for his own sake and that of his fellows. This will not, however, take us far towards a definition of a virtue, since there are many other qualities of a man that may be similarly beneficial, as for instance bodily characteristics such as health and physical strength, and mental powers such as those of memory and concentration.[@foot2002virtues 4]\
\
So, what differentiates virtue from strength? At first glance, the answer seems to be something about the will. Virtues are revealed not only by a person\'92s abilities but by his or her *intentions.* But what are intentions? Foot argues that the \'91will\'92 must be understood in its broadest sense, \'93to cover what is wished for as well as what is sought.\'94[@foot2002virtues\
\
What differentiates virtues from skills? }