{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##Nature and God\
Two broader metaphysical considerations merit a returning comment. The first is about the concept of nature. If nature is just that which is, then it is a truism and a tautology to say that naturalism is a true doctrine, where \'91naturalism\'92 is the thesis that only nature exists. Saying \'93only nature exists\'94 just means, on this account, \'93only things with natures exist\'94 or better yet, \'93only that which exists exists.\'94 I dare say only a madman would earnestly disagree. \
\
So on the one hand the doctrine that only nature exists is true but trivially true. On the other hand, the doctrine is question-begging and (in my view) false. If \'93nature\'94 is just physical stuff, then at least the statement \'93only nature exists\'94 is synthetic and not tautologous. On this account, of course, naturalism cannot but be physicalist. There is no \'93relaxed naturalism\'94 on this view. And it won\'92t do to assume physicalism without argument, especially in the face pressing reasons (from the ethical considerations about virtue inter alia) to believe some values and virtues and even our own human nature is not physical in this sense. But the present case is much worse than just begging the question. The attempt to clarify that takes \'93nature\'94 to mean \'93physical stuff\'94 will not do. Because the Greek word physis (\uc0\u966 \u973 \u963 \u953 \u962 ) from which we derive \'93physical\'94 \'97 exactly like the Latin word natura from which we derive \'93nature \'97 just means the inner core or essence or real substance of a given entity. To speak of God\'92s physical properties is quite literally to speak of what properties he has by nature, as opposed to by choice or convention or some other way. To say that the soul is physical is to say that the soul has it\'92s own nature, essence, form, underlying substance, hypostasis, or reality. At least, that is what those words might mean. So to assume that the very word \'91physicalism\'92 gets us to what we might want \'97 a denial of spooky stuff \'97 is already moving too fast, let alone assuming that the doctrine we are (futilely) expressing is true. \
\
What does the naturalist want to affirm or deny by claiming \'91nature\'92 as his own special metaphysical or epistemological ally? Perhaps she can take recourse to ostensive definitions. Ostensive definitions (like Frank Jackson\'92s) point to familiar exemplars of natural objects, tables, mountains, badgers, stars, etc. and define \'91natural properties\'92 as those \'91needed to give a complete account of things like them\'94 (183, quoting Jackson, From Metaphysics to Ethics, p.7). First, a non-naturalist can \'93insist that moral properties\'94 need be included in a complete account. Secondly, we cannot just assume that tables, mountains, badgers, stars are merely physical in that what appears to be is fully what is. It turns out that the table appears solid but is composed of an interlocking sub-atomic lattice shot through with empty space (or so we now surmise). Since \'91atom\'92 in Greek signifies \'91uncuttable\'92, the \'93atoms\'94 of the early 19th century are not actually atomic; what seems to be uncuttable, the smallest elemental bit of matter, turns out to be composed of hadrons (either baryons or mesons), which hadrons are composed of quarks, which are composed of... etc. As scandalous as it may sound, not even physical things are necessarily just physical. }