{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green26\blue26;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl322

\f0\fs26 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Murphy, Mark C. 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
God and moral law: On the theistic explanation of morality
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Oxford University Press, 2011.\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl420\sa200

\f1\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Mark Murphy's book is a first\uc0\u8208 rate discussion of the relationship between God and the moral law. It is clear and analytically rigorous, and breaks new ground especially in its criticism of leading views like natural law theory and theological voluntarism. There is also much that should be of interest to non\u8208 theists, including an extensive discussion of laws of nature. I will briefly summarise the book's six chapters before offering some general observations.\
Chapter 1 contains a detailed discussion of moral laws. Drawing on recent work on laws of nature, Murphy assesses various accounts of moral laws such as the law that one ought to help the undeservedly suffering (p. 18). Numerous problems are raised for attempts to understand such laws as mere universal generalisations or as statements of regularities forming a deductive system. Instead Murphy relies heavily on the Armstrong/Dretske/Tooley approach to laws of nature, where (roughly) there is a necessitation relation between universals such that one universal \'91selects\'92 another. In the moral case, what necessitates are non\uc0\u8208 moral features of (say) an action, and what is necessitated is either performing or not performing the action. To use Murphy's example, being the object of one's valid promise morally necessitates being performed (p. 36).\
Chapter 2 relates moral laws to moral facts, and also introduces the kind of explanatory account of moral laws that should be expected from a theistic perspective. Moral facts are of the general form, it is morally necessary for A to \uc0\u966  (p. 46). Murphy argues \'85\
}