{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Georgia;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Does virtue ethics rest on the ideally virtuous exemplars or real, virtuous exemplars? \
\
It seems that virtue ethics defines virtue with reference to what the ideally virtuous agent would do. The right course of action is \'93Wh
\f1\fs26 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
at a virtuous agent would, characteristically, do in the circumstances.\'94
\f2\fs24 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Hursthouse, 
\i On Virtue Ethics 
\i0 p. 17. 
\f2\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 On the other hand, Aristotle himself uses Pericles as an embodied, historical, flesh and blood moral exemplar. \
\
I argue that the hypothetical virtuous agent is neither action guiding nor content-full. 
\b0 \
Each exemplar embodies a tradition. MacIntyre says that \'93characters are the masks of ethical theories.\'94
\f2\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\i\fs28 After Virtue  
\i0 32? % 33?
\f2\fs24 \\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28  This is no objection against my view since I stand unabashedly in a broader western and narrower religious tradition. But it might be taken as an objection from a secular person who does not identify with either any religious tradition nor even with his or her own \'93civilization\'94, which is after all sexist, racist, classist, imperalist, or what have you. \
}