{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red20\green20\blue20;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The Key Ethical and Metaethical Challenges\
	
\b0 Each of my six writers promotes a philosophical ethics that is both ethical and metaethical. This is not surprising. As Sayre-Accord (2014) says: \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
it is no surprise that, in Plato's 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Republic
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, Polemarchus\'92 claim that being a just person enhances one's life developed quickly into a decidedly metaethical discussion of the origin and nature of justice. \
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	Much of the resistance to virtue ethics in contemporary philosophy does not come from disagreement about whether perseverance is really praiseworthy trait or drunkenness really a blameworthy one; the resistance comes the difficult or dubious claims about nature (that it is teleological) and human nature (that it is essentially different from animals). 	\
	So what metaphysical, epistemology, anthropological, and linguistic theses does a virtue ethicist need in order to underwrite her basic normative commitments? Neo-Aristotelian is widely viewed as \'93the official metaethical theory\'94 (Lenman 2006) of a mainstream virtue ethical theory. Neo-Aristotelian naturalism is taken by its adherents to be a species of moral realism (and hence cognitivism), of ethical naturalism. (Whether it is best understood as a form of \'93stance-independent\'94 realism or constructivism is an important question I shall consider below.) Neo-Aristotelians have a cognitivist semantic theory (albeit inchoate), a moral epistemology, a theory of motivation, and a philosophical anthropology. But this neo-Aristotelianism must be clarified and critiqued before it is defended. \
	I set myself the task of meeting seven challenges. The first four are primary ethical, the second four may be seen as metaethical. The seven challenges are as follows: 
\b \
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}First, \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
assuming that virtues exist and are real, what is a virtue? \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Virtue ethicists struggle to articulate just what defines them all, what \'93virtues\'94 are, and what the relationship is between virtue and happiness. There is unrest in the ranks. \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Each writer has a nuanced account that will bear close examination. Each account must contribute to our account. Virtues are human character traits,  (Hursthouse; MacIntyre; Foot; McDowell) but what kind? What non-controversial examples of virtues can we point to? \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Virtue is often defined in relation to happiness, as those qualities that contribute to or constitute happiness. What is happiness? \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Second, virtue ethicists struggle on the primary normative level to defend objections from rival approaches and from moral skeptics that the pursuit of virtue is merely egoistic, that virtues are culture-relative, that virtue norms are not action guiding (especially in the face of dilemmas), that it is self-effacing. \
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Third, \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
If we know what a virtue is, we can ask whether they are useful? An ethical theory is both practical and intellectual. It must be answer our questions but also give us at least some guidance, albeit general guidance, in living ethical lives. An objection on this point is that virtue ethical principles are not \'93action guiding\'94 enough. A second objection is that they 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
are 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
action guiding but basely egoistic.\
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Fourth, there are metaethical challenges. \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Do virtues even exist? Aristotle thought so, and so do my exemplars in contemporary virtue ethicists. But the first objection to taking virtue ethics as our ethical theory may be the challenge to the very existence or coherence of virtues. {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://54C0F2A4-3410-456B-8073-F7090F83125F"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Harman}} and R. Scott Smith pose versions of this challenge. The challenge must be met. \
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Fifth, even if virtues exist, are they important or essential to our ethical lives and ethical theories? Not every ethicist who utters words like \'91virtue\'92 and \'91vice\'92 and \'91happiness\'92 and \'91wisdom\'92 is a virtue ethicist. Kant and Mill also discuss virtue, as recent scholarship has made clear. But they do not make virtue the cornerstone or even very central to their ethical theories. Picking out one differentium that all contemporary virtue ethicists share is, perhaps, impossible. But what plausible or ostensive conditions can we lay out that a virtue ethicist satisfies? \
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Sixth, \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 virtue ethicists of the neo-Aristotelian sort (those that constitute my focus in this dissertation) take themselves to be a species of cognitivism, moral realism, ethical naturalism. So it, like its consequentialist or deontological co-realists, suffers under the  burden of defending each of these positions against sophisticated non-cognitivism, moral anti-realism, and ethical non-naturalism. Is being moral justified? \
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Seventh, there are questions of relativity and idealism. Even if we are cognitivists, should we be realists or constructivists? Thomas Nagel calls constructivism a species of subjectivism, while Hursthouse calls a view that is apparently identical a species of objectivism. \
{\listtext	
\f1 \uc0\u9702 
\f0 	}Eighth, and last, there are broader metaphilosophical and cosmic questions about the relation of virtue ethics to naturalism and theism. I suspect that some of the psychological and social opposition to virtue talk originates not from intellectual objections but from stereotypes and guilt by association. Is virtue ethics metaphysically 
\i naturalistic? 
\i0 Or is it theistic? Plantinga argues that \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
theism, not naturalism, is the scientific worldview (Plantinga 2011, p. 309). \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 Virtue ethicists like MacIntyre (1981), Foot (2001) and Stephen Brown (2008) depend heavily on the concept of telos for overcoming the is/ought gap. Anscombe (1967) recommends virtue talk as an alternative to divine law moralities; yet Robert Adams (2006) recommends virtue talk as a complement to divine law morality. \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\fi720\sl288\slmult1\sa200\pardirnatural
\cf0 Each of our writers has something to say to some or all of these challenges. \
}