{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## How I deal with Objections\
\
One reason I love reading Plato is that he never builds straw men. Not all dialogists in the history of philosophy have been purely intellectually honest. But Plato's characters are almost always real like Shakespeare's characters are real. They may be ridiculous -- especially the interlocutors, but Socrates too-- they may be mad, they may be uproariously funny, but they are always real. They are funny in the way real interlocutors are funny. They are ridiculous the way some of my undergraduates are ridiculous. They are mad the way some in my own family are mad. \
\
Plato's passion for giving the devil his due lead him to write (or one of his very gifted students to write) dialogues in which Socrates "loses". In *Cleitophon*, the eponymous character -- not Socrates -- gets the last word. If Plato intends his reader to disagree with Cleitophon, if he intends the reader to see the error in Cleitophon's thinking or in his character, that intention is buried layers deep in an intention to let Cleitophon speak with authenticity. Cleitophon's error, if he is in error, must be shown in the clearest relief, the brightest light, his own arguments through his own words in his own voice. The reader has to do the work to unbury the error. Or, finding the error, to \'93let the dead bury the dead.\'94 \
\
While writing a platonic dialogue is a form of art I still find appealing and still use, that is not the best vehicle for this dissertation. So I am forced to give the views I think mistaken the best hearing I can give them in my own voice. \
\
The challenge of metaethical inquiry, I think, is to engage readers who do not already agree with you. A constant danger to which we are all liable is assuming too many crucial propositions and arguing at length about a bunch of relatively peripheral propositions. Metaethicists who steer clear of this danger are the likes of Alan Gibbard and Robert Adams. There is some value to articulating, clarifying, and defending a view that reader and author both (already) share. But that is not the valuable enterprise I aim for. \
\
The test, I think, shall be whether these pages find readers who disagree with the core thesis I present, and if such can recognize "their own" purported view in the pages that follow. If they can not only recognize but resoundingly affirm the view expressed in that chapter, then my objections may have some bite and may earn the high honor of receiving a rebuttal. \
\
It would not be a failure if no one found these pages; most such essays do not find readers, even if they deserve them. Failure would be for some ethical naturalist to pick up the book or a chapter on a shelf or online, glance at the view expressed, and to disown what I claim is his own. \
}