{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## Virtue ##\
\
### MacIntyre\'92s Project: An Invitation to Restore Virtue ###\
\
The abiding theme of MacIntyre's ethical writings has been the invitation to give up on the hopeless elements of our modern liberal tradition and to return to Aristotelian (and Thomistic) tradition of virtue. This invitation assumes that our modern tradition is fatally flawed, that some parts at least are hopeless; and it assumes that the tradition of virtue will cure what ails. It also assume that moderns \'97 even putatively \'93anti-traditionalist\'94 moderns \'97 a part of a \'93tradition.\'94 I shall comment on both of these assumptions below. \
\
#### Audience\
MacIntyre\'92s ideal audience is "small farmers, fishermen (and women), schoolteachers who refuse to become bureaucratic functionaries, those who retain ideals of craftsmanship in manual or mental labor and members of cooperatives aimed at remedying hunger or homelessness."[@weinstein2003macintyre 8.] In other words, he writes to academics and to regular folks; to individuals and to communities. \
\
#### Influence\
MacIntyre's influence has been remarkable. Many have declined this invitation, but many have accepted it. Those who decline are more or less content with modern ethical and political thinking, offering corrections and improvements but not major overhaul; they find  MacIntyre's criticisms excessively polemical and his solutions needlessly radical. Those who accept tend to be more dissatisfied with the present modern culture, modern morality, and modern politics. \
\
\
### Philosophical Imagination\
The invitation to recover the virtues of the tradition of Aristotle (and Aquinas and others) is not a demand -- it really is an *invitation.* Readers who are discontent with modern culture and morality may well find MacIntyre's solutions compelling. Readers who are not so discontent may find something of interest in his criticisms; if not, they are invited to consider his solutions in a spirit of philosophical imagination. "*If* modern morality were a disaster... would this be a good solution?"}