{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red20\green20\blue20;}
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Neo-Aristotelianism\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200

\b0 \cf0 The final form of ethical naturalism to consider here is so-called neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics. This is the form I favor. It was inaugurated within anglophone circles by Elizabeth Anscombe, P. T. Geach, and others. It was picked up and promoted by Alasdair MacIntyre, Rosalind Hursthouse and others. These neo-Aristotelian thinkers take Aristotle\'92s ethical theorizing to be largely right. They happen also to find in Aristotle an alternative to nonnaturalism. Neo-Aristotelians straddle the line, some on one side, some on the other. For neo-Aristotelians, moral facts are grounded in human nature (MacIntyre 1981; Hursthouse 1999; Foot 2001; Brown 2008). \
Ethics seems to be the domain of rational creatures like us. We find ourselves morally motivated; we criticize others for failing to meet moral standards; we perceive or talk is if we perceive moral facts. So ultimately, ethical naturalism must give an account of this human experience. The early pragmatic naturalists were optimistic that even human experience can be understood without necessarily reducing humanity to mere matter and without ascribing to humanity a separate, spiritual nature discontinuous with the whole. In this way, neo-Aristotelianism is a form of ethical naturalism but it is also quite different from those discussed above. \
Human beings have a lifeform. This lifeform is discoverable either through familiar, \'93outside\'94 scientific investigation or through a combination of such investigation with familiar \'93inside\'94 ethical education and introspection.  \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200

\b \cf0 Objections to Neo-Aristotelianism Metaethics
\b0 \
But Lenman and others have worries about neo-Aristotelian metaethical foundations of virtue ethics. A first worry is about teleology. If the universe contains no final causes then we cannot appeal to final causes in our ethical theory. Or, if final causation is real but is only a feature of human agency \'97 our intentionality, our goal-orientation, our practical reasoning \'97 then still, we cannot appeal to final causes as external features of human nature, as are features like our being cordates or being primates. They are we might say features of our \'93inside\'94, our psychology, our cognitive capacities. \
A second worry is that even if we can evaluate a member of a species (cactus, deer, crocodile, human) by its success or failure at achieving the characteristic end of the species, such an evaluation is a \'93straightforward factual matter\'94; it is not evaluation but classification.\
\'93\cf2 Given such examples, a critic may urge, it's hard to see how we are here concerned here with 
\i evaluation
\i0  except in a highly deflationary sense that has little bearing on ethics, as opposed simply to a kind of 
\i classification
\i0 .\cf0 \'94 (Lenman 2006)\
Hursthouse argues that our rationality makes us different from other animals. So evaluating individual humans by how well we carry on in the rational way is not only 
\i distinctly evaluative 
\i0 but it is continuous with the manner of evaluation of non-rational animals. \
A third worry, in response to Hursthouse\'92s response to the second worry, is that we are no longer \'93naturalistic.\'94\
\'93\cf2 Once this is said, it might be objected, we've more or less left the naturalism behind. We don't need anything remotely like ethology to tell us that we should favour ethical views supported by good reasons to those not so supported nor do we need to be any sort of naturalists to believe it.\cf0 \'94 \
It is not clear what Lenman means by saying we\'92ve left 
\i naturalism 
\i0 behind. Does he mean metaphysical naturalism or simply the belief that ethical facts supervene on or are identical to natural facts? \
A fourth worry is about using rationality as the differentia of human species. This objection Lenman credits to Williams.\cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf2 \'93And we might legitimately follow Williams in asking if we're concerned with what is distinctively and characteristically human why make such a big deal about rationality. Why not the making of fire, having sexual intercourse without regard to season, despoiling the environment and upsetting the balance of nature or killing things for fun (Williams 1972, 73)? \cf0   \
An obvious preliminary reply to this objection is that all the actions Williams mentions are ones we uniquely undertake in virtue of our rationality. Fires occur naturally (from lightning strikes, lava, meteorites) but only humans have mastered the ability to make fire at will (from flint or rubbing sticks together or chemical combustion or what have you). All mammals have sexual intercourse, but only humans can deliberate about when and where to do so. By virtue of our practical rationality, we can obey motives that have nothing to do with sex drive (the desire for acceptance) or ignore cues that naturally increase sex drive (female ovulation). Despoiling the environment, killing things \'93for fun\'94 are, we might point out, abuses of our freedom. Only a creature with practical reason can elect (say) to preserve the environment; but by the same token only a creature with practical reason can elect to despoil it. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200

\b \cf0 Some further taxonomic reflections: Humanistic and Cosmological Metaethics
\b0 \
Viewed from a bit of a higher altitude, we can see that ethical naturalisms distinguish themselves by 
\i which 
\i0 natural facts ground moral facts. Though no one that I know of categorizes things this way, we might say that there are three options here: we can ground moral facts in (a) generic natural facts, facts about the cosmos as a whole; (b) facts about human nature as a whole (but not about non-human natural facts) \'97 {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://2DE90DEC-604E-41F2-9293-A7358ADA7D96"}}{\fldrslt McShea (1979) calls some of these \'93human nature ethical theories\'94. }}; or (c) facts about particular properties that humans have (rationality, belief-desire sets, laws, \
Call a metaethical theory humanistic if it defines value solely in reference to humans; call it cosmological if it defines value in reference to some broader metaphysical or natural (or theological?) entity and explains human value as a sub-set of value per se. Humanistic metaethical theories see value per se and human value as perfectly overlapping sets. Both (b) and (c) are humanistic. There is no such thing as \'93value for cacti\'94 or \'93value for martians.\'94 Most consequentialists are humanistic in that they think rightness just refers to acts or rules that benefit the most (human) people. Some would draw the circle a bit bigger and include any sentient life in what counts as people or what counts as worth caring about their happiness.  \
But (a) is cosmological. For example, Boyd defines a moral fact R as grounded in a natural kind B, where B is a property or property cluster instantiated by familiar goods like food, shelter, friendship, freedom of speech,  and democratic process, since those natural things contribute to human welfare. But the natural kind B that realizes or supervenes on R is fundamentally no different from natural kinds like 
\i metal, 
\i0 and 
\i tiger. 
\i0 Hence goodness 
\i for us 
\i0 is a property of tending towards our benefit; but it is at least in principle possible to extend this account to other similar properties. Goodness for cacti is a (different!) homeostatic property cluster that tends toward 
\i their 
\i0 benefit. \
Jackson a moral fact R is identical to a (big, ugly disjunctive) fact B about people\'92s approvals, actions, tendencies, etc. The natural fact (B) is 
\i only 
\i0 a natural fact of humans. No humans, no moral facts (since no natural facts which are identical to moral facts). \
For Hursthouse, a moral fact R is grounded in idealized human nature or an idealized human agents. Moral facts are grounded in something 
\i generic 
\i0 to humanity as a species. It is not widely fashionable to use locutions like \'91human nature\'92 to describe the set of powers and capacities shared by all humans (at least potentially), but neo-Aristotelians often do speak of human nature in this way (Brown 2008). Moral facts are not grounded in the actions or beliefs of a particular human person or a particular human community, but in human nature itself.}