{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## Disclaimers and Miscellany\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ### My own views\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
One of the key technical terms we will learn from Alasdair MacIntyre is *tradition*. For MacIntyre, a tradition is a socially-embedded argument. Each of us is raised within a tradition. \
I speak from within the broad tradition of western civilization, which has argued since Plato over fundamental questions about goodness, reality, truth, beauty, and knowledge. I consider myself an Aristotelian, not in that I agree with every jot and tittle of his complete works, but in that I and many if not all westerners are descendants of the Greco-Roman culture that survives in Europe and America, and has in many respects spread to Asia, Africa, Russia, Australia and the world. \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\
\
But traditions are concentric; I am also an anglophone U. S. American from California. \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
I count this as an exercise in American Ethics. Now, any philosophy that claims to be American must be in some way pragmatist. But method over doctrine doctrine means that the doctrines are fluid, flexible, in process, evolving. So those who resist my conclusions must either refute them or be branded enemies of progress. For a methodological naturalist who is consistent to deviate from the present orthodoxy is not a complaint but a necessary project demanded by present orthodoxy. Just as to be a single called organism is to cease being single called but become multi-celled, to be human is to become transhuman.\'a0\
\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\
I am a born-again Orthodox Christian. Only in the later chapters do I revisit some of these questions from the unique vantage point offered by the Christian narrative, which is just the vantage point offered by seeing all of Christ\'92s creation (especially ourselves) in light of Christ. In this and in the subsequent chapters leading up to that final one, I restrict myself to the Aristotelian tradition. Firstly, I wish to seek common ground with my atheist, rationalist, or humanist readers who share with me not a common faith but a common civilization. Secondly, I wish to find out as much about nature and human nature by the light of reason, philosophical reflection on experience, and empirical study.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\slminimum320
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
I count this as an exercise in Greco-Roman-Euro-American philosophy.\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ### Audience\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\slminimum320

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
My audience are not merely those who (like me) trust, admire, worship and obey Jesus. My audiences are those who admire but do not worship, trust but do not obey. \'a0These might be agnostic, spiritual but not religious, or atheistic. But I do not presume atheism in this work. I presume that all evidences, physical, psychological and social are on the table. All experience and all science and all reason are for me sources, but no revelation other than the revelation of reason.\
\
I hope in future work to explore those questions of especial interest to us who have more resources available to answering them, like Alvin Plantinga and Robert Adams.\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 ### A double danger\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 My goal is not to write from within my tradition as a theist and indeed a Christian. The resources available for thinking about virtue are much greater. Rather, if the church to which I belong is a citadel on the hill, and the broader western tradition is a city spread out like a wheel on the surrounding terrain, my goal is to leave the citadel and see how much work can be done in the city. Outside the city, of course, are the villages, towns, and countryside homes. And beyond that, wilderness. I shall not have much to say to the wild men who are utter moral strangers. \
The double danger of limiting myself to what can be said about virtue and nature from within a public and secular tradition is that both audiences are liable to misunderstand me: fellow theists or fellow Christians in particular may assume that I ignore the extra resources available to me out of disbelief or ignorance; fellow westerners who do belong or might belong to the tradition of Aristotle will assume that I consider the more narrow domain of secular discourse as a means of proselytizing for my faith, inching towards God. Both sides may think me either disingenuous or misguided. This is a danger that can be mitigated by explicit avowals of my true intentions. But such misunderstandings cannot be wholly guarded against. I think the reward is worth the risk. To detail neo-Aristotelianism and to give a novel account of naturalism that both theists and atheists or agnostics can consider, modify, and in part accept, is worth all the trouble. \
\
### The amoralist objection\
My tradition accepts that it is good to be good and that we have a rational obligation to become virtuous. My tradition also generates an impressive list of virtues and a cohesive account of their relation and ultimate foundation. I do not pretend that this dissertation gives an account adequate to the task of *persuading* an amoralist, a moral skeptic, or moral nihilist. Then again, I\'92m not sure *any* account of morality could do that task. Plato\'92s *Republic*[@plato Republic, 621c] is devoted to (among many other things!) answering Glaucon\'92s hypothetical question: is virtue for its possessor better than vice? Why be virtuous? Is there *any* reason to be virtuous, excluding the admittedly external, contingent, or social benefits that accrue to the person who *appears* virtuous \'97 such as honor, respect, position, friendship, etc. Yet even that book ends ambiguously with Socrates urging a *story* that \'93could save us, if we are persuaded by it\'94; as for Glaucon\'92s response\'85 we hear only silence. Is he persuaded? Asleep? Still hesitant? Plato leaves us questioning. \
\
Foot *will* attempt to address the Nietzschean immoralist. Not being hungry for such an answer myself, I cannot judge whether it would satisfy someone genuinely undecided as to whether or not being being good is a good idea. \
\
My goal rather is to *clarify* and *elucidate* the tradition in which I find myself. This will mainly be of interest to fellow adherents of the tradition (broadly) of virtues. But it will be of interest to others in related or rival traditions. \
\
My position within my tradition renders impossible two goals \'97 goals that are otherwise fine and admirable goals for someone to aim for. The first is the goal of persuading the amoralist. I leave that for others more worthy to the task.[@superson2009moral] The second is the goal of persuading the adherent of a rival tradition. Though MacIntyre occupies the center stage of only one chapter, the entire dissertation is undertaken in a *MacIntyrean* spirit. The best a member of a rival tradition can hope is for an \'93as if\'94 account \'97 a clear account that can serve the philosophical imagination of one who *already wants* to learn a \'93second-language\'94 of another moral tradition. \
}