{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ##What are we trying to explain? \
\
The explananda that our metaethical theorizing aims to explain is not easy to define. Here are some things I don\'92t think we are trying to explain: we are not trying to give moral guidance to the morally confused. Most people have firm moral convictions on a wide range of issues. Theists have ready-made moralities on a wide range of issues given to them, they take it, by god. Atheists as it happens often have a wide range of moral beliefs based on the responsibility we have as humans if we are alone in the universe and solely responsible for our destinies, our disasters, and our hopes. In *An Atheist\'92s Guide to Reality* by Alex Rosenburg, as a popular middlebrow example, he lays out how atheists ought to approach personal, interpersonal, and political challenges that life puts before each of us. By contrast, Peter Kreeft\'92s  Making Choices is a theistic version of much the same guide. There are certainly moral disagreements at a cultural level, [which we have already had occasion to mention: abortion, sexual ethics, family ethics, international law, legal policy, foreign policy, poverty and wealth, religious freedom, freedom of speech, etc.] and within sub-cultures and even within each of us. But disagreement is most often between parties dedicated to a firm moral conviction. We are therefore not doing metaethics to give the morally confused a bit of advice. We are usually doing metaethics to examine why we have the moral beliefs\
\
What we are puzzling over is normativity. In light of naturalism broadly construed \'97 in light of modern empirical science and reductive philosophy \'97 we are puzzling over the contrast between norms and everything else non-normative. Everything that is puzzling, from naturalistic assumptions, about moral norms is equally or almost equally puzzling about epistemic norms, as Professor Cuneo has labored to show. For this reason, it would be wrong-headed and myopic to speak only of moral norms. \
\
We are not just examining a few words, like \'91goodness\'92 or \'91right.\'92 To read some metaethicist literature, one would think that the only puzzle about ethics is the perpetual recurrence in all evaluative and normative discourse of the English word \'91good.\'92 We are not just puzzling over language merely but intentionality in thought, speech, discourse, and in deliberation. That is, normativity as it shows up in everyday utterances like \'93that was a good movie, thanks for the recommendation\'94 or she is a good teacher; you should take her class\'94 but also much more: Normativity shows up in my private thoughts (\'93how can I lose weight? what is wrong with my health?\'94) in communication (\'93what do you think of your Sienna? Is it better or worse than your old Odyssey?\'94) and in deliberation (\'93what is to be done with Iran? Is Guantanomo Bay to be shut down?\'94). We are trying to explain the pervasiveness of normativity. \
\
First I have to show you why it needs explaining. Then I have to show you why a paradigmatic moral realism enriched by virtue theory is such a satisfying explanans. Finally, I have to show you why other some other theories are not so satisfying on some or all explananda. Some of these theories at which I will level critique are virtue theories, but others are not. The ones that do not rely on (or even mention) virtue I show to be significantly conceptually impoverished by contrast to virtue theoretical approaches. The the ones that do rely on virtue attempt to remain in the fold of naturalism broadly construed. So I have to show that such an attempt is misguided. My argument that trying to make virtue theories naturalistic is misguided has two parts: the first that \'93naturalism broadly construed\'94 gives up on the core naturalist tenets that motivate naturalists to avoid non-naturalism in the first place. Such a broad construal is naturalistic in name only. The second part that naturalism excludes the notions of virtue altogether. \
\
}