{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\fs22 \cf0 \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl276\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b\fs28 \cf0 11.	Peter Railton\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0\fs22 \cf0 \
Boyd and Railton are moral realists but ethical naturalists \'97 Railton has playfully described himself as a \'93stark, raving moral real[ist]\'94 in \'93Moral Naturalism.\'94 In this essay, Railton summarizes the response of two camps to the conditional proposition that if moral realism is to be make \'93good sense\'94 then reason or science must \'93afford a foundation for ethics\'94 (163). The first camp affirms the antecedent and hence the consequent; the second camp denies the consequent and hence denies the antecedent. He admits that \'93ethical naturalism has yet to find a plausible synthesis of the empirical and the normative\'94 (163). That synthesis Railton attempts, with the modest aim of providing\'94 an analysis of epistemology or ethics that permits us to see how the central evaluative functions of this domain could be carried out within existing (or prospective) empirical theories... [and] how traditional nonnaturalist accounts rely upon assumptions that are in some way incoherent, or that fit ill with existing science...\'94 (164). \
\
	Railton playfully offers a list of what kinds of views might count as realist: \
\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl276\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 1.	Cognitivism \'97 Are moral judgments capable of truth or falsity? Yes or No\
2.	Theories of truth \'97 If moral judgments do have truth values, in what sense? \
3.	Objectivity \'97 in what ways, if any, does the existence of moral properties depend upon the actual or possible states of mind of intelligent beings?\
4.	Reductionism \'97 Are moral properties reducible to (or do they supervene upon) nonmoral properties?\
5.	Naturalism \'97 Are moral properties natural properties? \
6.	Empiricism \'97 Do we come to know moral facts the same way we come to know the facts of empirical science, or are they revealed by reason or by some special mode of apprehension?\
7.	Bivalence \'97 Does the principle of the excluded middle apply to moral judgments? \
8.	Determinateness \'97 Given whatever procedures we have for assessing moral judgments, how much morality is likely to be determinable? \
9.	Categoricity \'97 Do all rational agents necessarily have some reason to obey moral imperatives?\
10.	Universality \'97 Are moral imperatives applicable to all rational agents, even (should such exist) those that lack a reason to comply with them?\
11.	Assessment of existing moralities \'97 Are present moral beliefs approximately true, or do prevailing moral intuitions in some other sense constitute privileged data?\
12.	Relativism \'97 Does the truth or warrant of moral judgments depend directly upon individually- or socially-adopted norms or practices? \
13.	Pluralism \'97 Is there a uniquely good form of life or a uniquely right moral code?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 \
A shorter version in my own words of Railton\'92s \'93multidimensional conceptual space\'94: along with Railton\'92s answer. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl276\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 1.	Cognitivism \'97 Can moral judgments be true or false 
\b Yes 
\b0 \
2.	Theories of truth \'97 Do moral judgments have normal truth values? 
\b No
\b0 \
3.	Objectivity \'97 Are moral properties mind-dependent entities? 
\b Yes, relational
\b0 \
4.	Reductionism \'97 Do moral properties supervene on or reduce to nonmoral? 
\b Yes
\b0 \
5.	Naturalism \'97 Are moral properties natural properties? 
\b Yes
\b0 \
6.	Empiricism \'97 Do we know moral facts the same way as empirical facts? 
\b Yes
\b0  \
7.	Bivalence \'97 Does the principle of the excluded middle apply to moral judgments? 
\b Not sure
\b0  \
8.	Determinateness \'97 Is all morality determinable, some, or none? 
\b Not sure
\b0 \
9.	Categoricity \'97 Do all rational agents necessarily have some reason to obey moral imperatives? \
10.	Universality \'97 Are rational agents lacking a reason to comply with a moral imperative required to obey it anyway?  
\b No
\b0 \
11.	Assessment of existing moralities \'97 Are present moral beliefs approximately true, or do prevailing moral intuitions in some other sense constitute privileged data?\
12.	Relativism \'97 Does the truth or warrant of moral judgments depend directly upon individually- or socially-adopted norms or practices? \
13.	Pluralism \'97 Is there a uniquely good form of life or a uniquely right moral code?  
\b No
\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl276\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 \
Railton sets up the fact/value distinction as the strongest objection to realism. In its epistemic mode, the objection claims that after all factual, scientific, rational \'93means of adjudication have been deployed\'94 that value disputes can persist (166). Such an objection depends on a notion of reason as merely instrumental, which Railton endorses (166). But he denies Hume\'92s \'93thesis of the practicality of moral judgment\'94 in order to \'93remove the ground of his contrast between facts and values\'94 (170). \
\
Railton argues that values are real on the basis of \'93independence\'94 (the value has \'93certain determinate features independent of whether we think it exists\'94) and \'93feedback\'94 (the ability of us to interact with it and it with us) (172). Railton makes an analogy between value and the external world. The reality of the external world best explains its seeming independence and feedback. \
\
(The fact that values (non-moral values first) seem to exhibit independence and feedback shows that it is real.) \
\
The \'93reduction basis\'94 of a secondary quality like sweetness or desirability is a \'93complex set of relational, dispositional, primary qualities\'94 such that \'93in ordinary circumstances sugar excites a certain gustatory sensation in me\'94 (173). Subjective interests are secondary qualities but do not constitute desirableness. To get desirableness, one has to endow an individual A with \'93unqualified cognitive and imaginative powers, and full factual and nomological information about his physical and psychological constitution, capacities, history, and so on\'94 (174). \
\
Railton sketches a wants/interests mechanism that explains an agent\'92s actions. An agent (Lonnie) used to drink milk when he felt sick while travelling, but comes to drink clear liquids because of the positive feedback (albeit unconscious feedback) he gets from drinking 7-Up. The explanation is that Lonnie\'92s subjective interest (his wants) has come into closer alignment with his objective interest (the desirability of clear liquids). The objective interest is defined as a set of relational facts\
\
The wants/interests mechanism gets us objective 
\i non-moral 
\i0 value. How does Railton bridge the gap to moral value, to rights and wrongs? \
\
Morality is rationality from a social point of view \'97 \'93what would be rationally approved of were the interests of all potentially affected individuals counted equally under circumstances of full and vivid information\'94 (190). The \'93feedback\'94 of irrational or normatively wrong social behaviors a \'93potential for dissatisfaction and unrest\'94 (191). \
\
Sharon Street categorizes Railton as an antirealist since the natural properties that constitute value properties are the attitudes of an agent, albeit an ideal agent. The values are not attitude-independent. % Street, \'93A Darwinian Dilemma for Moral Realists\'94. }