{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat143\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720

\f0\fs26 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
11. Brink, David. Moral Realism and the Foundations of Ethics. Cambridge 1989.\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f1\b\fs28 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 David Brink, 
\i Moral Realism
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 Overview:\
Synopsis:\
Reflections:\
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri220\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 "We begin as (tacit) realists about ethics. Moral claims make assertions, which can be true or false; some people are morally more perceptive than others; and people\'92s moral views have not only changed over time but have improved in many cases (e.g., as regards slavery)." (Brink 1989, 23)\
\
Moral realism is a defeasible presumption, like realism about the external world.  Michael DePaul summarizes Brink's book on Moral Realism as follows: "A commonsense view of the objectivity of science" and 'ethics is or can be objective in much the same way.' (Brink p. 6, DePaul p. 731). \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri220\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\fi720\ri220\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 He says Brink combines "Externalist moral psychology, coherentist epistemology, non-reductive naturalism, and utilitarianism"\
\
Brink critiques expressivism and prescriptivism by noting that "we can make moral judgments with no intention of expressing one's feelings and with no intention or even hope of influencing others' conduct" (Brink 26). \
\
Internalism about moral motivation at least is the view moral motivation follows inevitably upon the acceptance of a moral concept. (David Sztybel)\
\
Brink notes a frequent boast of noncognitivists that since their theories commonly analyze ethics in terms of feelings or attitudes, they can better account for moral motivation, whereas merely agreeing to the \'93fact\'94 of objective value need not motivate at all, as David Hume observed. The thesis that moral motivation follows from accepting moral ideas is called \'93internalism.\'94  \
\
One objection to moral realism is the claim that moral facts are not causally important to the physical or non-moral world, that they do not feature in explanations of non-moral facts. "It has been said that moral facts even if they existed could not explain any nonmoral facts. However, Brink gives the plausible example that someone intending to keep a promise, a moral fact, helps explain the nonmoral fact of what they actually set about doing in the world" (Sztybel 6). \
\
Brink and Boyd are both utilitarians (or welfarists?) but Brink does not reduce happiness to pleasure or preference-satisfaction. \
\
Some objectively valuable things include: \
"\'85certain character traits, the exercise of certain capacities, and the development of certain relations with others and to the world, and that the value of such a life is independent of the pleasure it contains and whether or not this sort of life is desired or would be desired in some preferred epistemic state." (Brink 221)\
\
}