{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 Dissertation Project Task Plan\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Research (June 2015-June 2016)\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	2.	}
\b0 Gather reading materials from JSTOR,  \'91neo-aristotelianism\'92 \'91naturalism,\'92 \'91ethical naturalism,\'92 and \'91virtue ethics\'92.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\b {\listtext	3.	}
\b0 Search Phil Index for \'91neo-aristotelianism\'92 \'91naturalism,\'92 \'91ethical naturalism,\'92 and \'91virtue ethics\'92.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\b {\listtext	4.	}
\b0 Search Google Scholar for  \'91neo-aristotelianism\'92 \'91naturalism,\'92 \'91ethical naturalism,\'92 and \'91virtue ethics\'92.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\b {\listtext	5.	}
\b0 Search {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://Oxford.edu"}}{\fldrslt Oxford.edu}} for  \'91neo-aristotelianism\'92 \'91naturalism,\'92 \'91ethical naturalism,\'92 and \'91virtue ethics\'92.\
\ls1\ilvl0
\b Search {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://Amazon.com"}}{\fldrslt Amazon.com}} for 
\b0  \'91neo-aristotelianism\'92 \'91naturalism,\'92 \'91ethical naturalism,\'92 and \'91virtue ethics\'92.\
{\listtext	7.	}Learn how to compile in Scrivener\
{\listtext	8.	}Learn how to do Bibdesk / Latex within Scrivener\
{\listtext	9.	}Test out Pandoc for making Latex citations\
{\listtext	10.	}Test our exporting from Scrivener to markdown, from markdown to Latex through pandoc or Sublime\
\ls1\ilvl0
\b Organize
\b0 \
\ls1\ilvl0
\b {\listtext	12.	}
\b0 Add citation info into Bibdesk\
{\listtext	13.	}Add titled notecard in Scrivener\
{\listtext	14.	}Sort research notes from previous Area Proposal readings\
{\listtext	15.	}Borrow from library\
{\listtext	16.	}Buy on Google Books or Kindle\
{\listtext	17.	}Create to buy list\
{\listtext	18.	}Order hard copy books from UWBG
\b \
Read\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 {\listtext	20.	}Read from the \'93To Read\'94 list\
{\listtext	21.	}Read on Kindle\
{\listtext	22.	}Read on phone\
{\listtext	23.	}Read on Google books\
{\listtext	24.	}Read hard cover books\
{\listtext	25.	}Read PDFs\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 {\listtext	26.	}Think and write
\b0 \
{\listtext	27.	}Write notes on \'93To Read\'94 list\
{\listtext	28.	}Write in \'93Dissertation notes\'94 on Notepad\
{\listtext	29.	}Review important works\
{\listtext	30.	}Summarize the main thesis of each work.\
{\listtext	31.	}Copy an abstract from Google Scholar or PhilPapers\
{\listtext	32.	}Write in disputation format the arguments for that main thesis or subsidiary theses.\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx1680\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	33.	}Copy notes into theme-specific Scrivener location.\
{\listtext	34.	}Write preliminary responses and notes on these themes. \
{\listtext	35.	}Discuss in seminars, and write responses.\
{\listtext	36.	}Discuss with Lindsay, and write responses.\
{\listtext	37.	}
\b Write chapters
\b0 \
{\listtext	38.	}Write draft 1 chapter 1\
{\listtext	39.	}Write draft 1 chapter 2\
{\listtext	40.	}Write draft 1 chapter 3\
{\listtext	41.	}Write draft 1 chapter 4\
{\listtext	42.	}Write draft 1 chapter 5\
{\listtext	43.	}Write draft 1 chapter 6\
{\listtext	44.	}Write draft 1 chapter 7 \
{\listtext	45.	}Write draft 2 chapter 2\
{\listtext	46.	}Write draft 2 chapter 3\
{\listtext	47.	}Write draft 2 chapter 4\
{\listtext	48.	}Write draft 2 chapter 5\
{\listtext	49.	}Write draft 2 chapter 6\
{\listtext	50.	}Write draft 2 chapter 7\
{\listtext	51.	}Write draft 2 chapter 1\
{\listtext	52.	}
\b Revise\
{\listtext	53.	}
\b0 Fix all % footnotes\
{\listtext	54.	}Fix all % comments and \
{\listtext	55.	}Create preliminary bibliography using footnotes and Bibdesk\
{\listtext	56.	}Write draft 3 chapter 1\
{\listtext	57.	}Write draft 3 chapter 2\
{\listtext	58.	}Write draft 3 chapter 3\
{\listtext	59.	}Write draft 3 chapter 4\
{\listtext	60.	}Write draft 3 chapter 5\
{\listtext	61.	}Write draft 3 chapter 6\
{\listtext	62.	}Write draft 3 chapter 7\
{\listtext	63.	}Submit chapters to Bradshaw\
{\listtext	64.	}Print chapter 2\
{\listtext	65.	}Edit chapter 2\
{\listtext	66.	}Print chapter 3\
{\listtext	67.	}Edit chapter 3\
{\listtext	68.	}Print chapter 4\
{\listtext	69.	}Edit chapter 4\
{\listtext	70.	}Print chapter 5\
{\listtext	71.	}Edit chapter 5\
{\listtext	72.	}Print chapter 6\
{\listtext	73.	}Edit chapter 6\
{\listtext	74.	}Print chapter 7\
{\listtext	75.	}Edit chapter 7\
{\listtext	76.	}Write front matter draft 2 \
{\listtext	77.	}
\b Finalize (Re-write whole dissertation chapter by chapter)\
{\listtext	78.	}
\b0 Write draft 3 chapter 2\
{\listtext	79.	}Write draft 3 chapter 3\
{\listtext	80.	}Write draft 3 chapter 4\
{\listtext	81.	}Write draft 3 chapter 5\
{\listtext	82.	}Write draft 3 chapter 6\
{\listtext	83.	}Write draft 3 chapter 7\
{\listtext	84.	}Write draft 4 chapter 1\
{\listtext	85.	}Write front matter draft 3\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx1680\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0
\b \cf0 {\listtext	86.	}Final edit\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1120\tx1680\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 {\listtext	87.	}Pay for editor to edit\
{\listtext	88.	}Make changes\
{\listtext	89.	}Write abstract\
{\listtext	90.	}Finalize front matter (dedication, abstract, etc.)\
{\listtext	91.	}Finalize formatting according to graduate school standard\
{\listtext	92.	}Print}