{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red102\green102\blue102;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid5}
{\list\listtemplateid6\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid501\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid6}
{\list\listtemplateid7\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid601\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid7}
{\list\listtemplateid8\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid701\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid8}
{\list\listtemplateid9\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid801\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid802\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid9}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}{\listoverride\listid6\listoverridecount0\ls6}{\listoverride\listid7\listoverridecount0\ls7}{\listoverride\listid8\listoverridecount0\ls8}{\listoverride\listid9\listoverridecount0\ls9}}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb480\sa120
\ls1\ilvl0
\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Wolterstorff, 
\i Justice  
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Nicholas Wolterstorff, 
\i Justice, 
\i0 Princeton University Press, Princeton: 2008. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf2 Overview:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Wolterstorff aims to give an account of justice as natural rights in order to defend those who have been wronged. He aims to use rights-talk because it \'91brings to speech\'92 the \'91patient-dimension\'92 of moral action, that is, not the one who acts rightly or wrongly but the one wronged or loved. \
\
What is a right? A \'93normative social relationship\'94 (12). What is justice? \'93I think of a social order as just insofar as its members enjoy the goods to which they have rights\'94 (10). The alternative is that justice is \'93natural law for the right ordering of society\'94 \'97 the objective and transcendent agent-dimension rather than the subjective immanent patient-dimension. \
\
What is the issue? 1. It seems to be \'93are there natural rights?\'94 but even right-order theorists can concede that there are. 2. It seems to be \'93are there 
\i inherent 
\i0 natural rights (or only conferred by God, by law, by government, etc.)? But the right order theorist can concede that God has natural rights (Chp 3). 3. It seems to be \'93are there inherent 
\i human 
\i0 natural rights?\'94 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf2 Synopsis:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf2 Introduction: \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Should we use justice talk? \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 It seems we ought not use justice talk.\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 1.	For Love has transcended justice (1).\
2.	The ethic of care is less individualistic than justice (2).\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0\cf0 On the other hand, justice is the members enjoying the goods to which they have rights. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 1.	No response yet\
2.	No response yet\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Should we use rights-talk?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 It seems that we ought not use rights-talk. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl0\cf0 1.	For some alleged rights are silly (2). \
2.	It has empowered all the largest (and wrong-headed) social protest movements of the 20th century (2-3); \
3.	Rights-talk is inherently individualistic, egoistic, and possessive (3).\
4.	For it is nonsense (4)\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl0\cf0 \
On the other hand, I argue that rights are \'93normative social bonds\'94 and that word/concept is both true and needful (4-5). \
\
On rights\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0\cf0 1.	Some rights are silly, but others are not. We must correct rather than abolish the rights-talk (2).\
2.	Rights-talk has empowered these movements by focussing on/talking about the 
\i oppressed, 
\i0 the 
\i wronged
\i0 , and that\'92s as it should be. Only oppressors want to keep attention off the moral-patient (6).\
3.	Rights-talk is only 
\i contingently 
\i0 egoistic and individualistic (6); \
4.	We can develop an account that is not nonsense.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0
\b \cf0 \
Whether justice should be grounded in inherent rights or right order?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\
Normative social bonds are claims against me had by others that I act or refrain from acting in particular ways. Rights-talk is necessary to \'93bring to speech\'94 the \'93recipient-dimension\'94 or \'93patient-dimension\'94 of duty, obligation, guilt, benevolence, virtue, etc (7-8). \
\
It seems that justice is \'93right order\'94, not grounded ultimately on inherent rights (10). But they are. \'93A social order [is] just insofar as its members enjoy the good to which they have rights\'94 (10). \
\
Some rights are conferred (by God, an objective norm, or society), others are inherent. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Whether there is a third conception of justice as equality? \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls6\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 It seems that there is a third conception of justice. For...\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls7\ilvl0\cf0 1.	It seems that justice is equality, as Aristotle assumes, and Aquinas and Hume concede (13-14).\
2.	Justice is always comparative. \
3.	Aquinas\'92 view of justice as both \'93external\'94 to humanity (in Divine Natural Law) and \'93internal\'94 to humanity (in imprinted Natural Law), since we partake of God\'92s eternal reason and eternal law (I-II, 91, 2).  \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls7\ilvl0\cf0 \
On the other hand, these \'93third\'94 ways are either false or reduce, under scrutiny, to the same two options. \
\
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls8\ilvl0\cf0 1.	But \'93justice is sometimes present when equality of treatment is absent, and equality is sometimes present when justice is absent\'94 (14). \
2.	Justice is not always comparative, because a student whose work merits an A does so whether or not there are other students, or regardless of what other students merit (15). \
3.	Strictly speaking, Aquinas does not give an account of justice (42). He merely talks about the feature (equality) of some or all instantiations of justice. So he has the same two choices of justice as grounded in objective right order or subjective inherent rights. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls8\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls8\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Whether Wolterstorff agrees or disagrees with Rawls? \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls8\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Rawl\'92s theory of justice assumes \'93justice [as] inherent natural rights\'94 \'97 this book is about developing an account of that assumption (15).  \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls8\ilvl0
\b \cf2 Chapter 2. A Contest of Narratives\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls8\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 The \'93polemic\'94 that treats justices as right order instead of inherent rights is a narrative. Ockham is blamed as the father of modern rights. \
\
Joan O\'92Donovan and Alistair MacIntyre, Michael Villey, Leo Strauss tell the narrative; Brian Tierney and Charles Reid tell the counter narrative. The 12th and 13th century thinkers like Decretists, popes, and emperors were talking about 
\i ius 
\i0 as both objective law and subjective right (54-55). They spoke of power, faculty, liberties, authority, and justice, as well as \'93right\'94 (57). \
\
Villey\'92s narrative has two \'93main parts\'94 (48). Earlier Latin jurists were not using our concept of right when they used \'91ius,\'92 and that Ockham is somehow the culprit of the decline from Thomism (48-49). \
\
Thirdly, the story goes,  Enlightenment thinkers (HObbes, Locke, etc.) built on this foundation by arguing that the individuals are bearers of subjective rights and \'93the principal task of the state\'94 is to protect those rights (51). This is the \'93possessive individualism\'94 that is the bugbear of the rights-talk-is-bad narrative. \
\
The counter-narrative shows that earlier thinkers 
\i did 
\i0 use \'91ius\'92 in our sense (54ff). It exists in the Roman jurists, according to Donahue, where a right is \'91had\'92 by someone or \'91belongs\'92 to someone (59). Maybe not natural rights but definitely subjective rights. The Church Fathers speak of what is due to the poor, what belongs to them (61).\
\
So what is the real issue? (62). 
\i Whether natural rights are conferred (by God, man, or \'91some objective norm\'92) or inherent
\i0 . \'93Tierney and Reid do not address the issue.\'94\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls8\ilvl0
\b \cf2 Chapter 3. Justice in the Old Testament/Hebrew Bible\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls8\ilvl0\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls8\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 What is 
\i mishpat? 
\i0 Primary or secondary justice? O\'92Donovan seems to think it is only secondary. The Hebrew word for justice is \'93mishpat\'94 and righteousness is \'93tsedeqa.\'94 Mishpat connotes judicial performance (69). It is not about primary justice but rectifying justice (71). Oliver O\'92Donovan seems to be making the error of saying there can be secondary justice (going back to the correct state of things) without primary justice (the correct state of things) \'97- which is incoherent (72). So mishpat must refer to both (75). \
\
The \'91quartet of the vulnerable\'92 are the widows, orphans, poor, and foreigners. Justice requires care for these. Not overly-preferential in their favor, but not under-preferential (77-78). God took care of the low ones (us!) so we are to take care of the low ones (80-81). God loves justice (81-82). God enjoins justice in Isreal but outside as well (82-88). We can wrong the lowly, but in so doing we wrong God as well (89). \
\
Is this more a right-order or inherent-rights notion? They don\'92t have \'93theory\'94 so we have to interpret their assumptions (91). \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0
\f1 \cf0 \uc0\u9679 
\f0 	Is there recognition of the recipient-side, the patient-dimension? \
\pard\tx1080\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl1
\f1 \cf0 \uc0\u9675 
\f0 	Since God can be wronged, it seems so.\
\ls9\ilvl1
\f1 \uc0\u9675 
\f0 	
\b \'93wronging\'94 God means \'93depriving him of that to which he has a right\'94
\b0  
\b \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0
\f1\b0 \cf0 \uc0\u9679 
\f0 	Is there recognition of human worth? \
\ls9\ilvl0
\f1 \uc0\u9679 
\f0 	Is there recognition that the worth of persons grounds how they ought to be treated?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0\cf0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls9\ilvl0
\b \cf2 Chapter 4. On De-Justicizing the New Testament\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 The agapism of Nygren urges that justice has been ecclipsed by a love that gives people what is 
\i not 
\i0 their due, that confers rather than recognizes worth. Eros love seeks the well-being of the lover; nomos is basically justice, but agape does not love people because they are infinitely valuable but because he is a lover and gives the gift of value (100). \'93There is no motive for the love in the loved object itself....\'94 (102, quoting Nygren). Agape might be grounded in \'93attachment\'94 (affection?) (103). \
\
But what about our love for God? We cannot love God (neither with eros nor agape) \'97 so that seems to be a 
\i reductio. 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0
\i \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0
\i0 \cf0 Also, forgiveness requires the violation of a right or the violation of justice (106). \
\
Also, we cannot \'93forgive\'94 (as in permit to continue doing evil) someone who is perpetrating evil on another. We have to protect the victim (108). \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls9\ilvl0
\b \cf2 Chapter 5. Justice in the New Testament Gospels\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Justice is much discussed in Luke-Acts \'97 if we translate 
\i dike 
\i0 and its cognates as justice rather than righteousness, which has very different connotations (111). Jesus is presented as the justice-bringing par excellence, the same justice bearer from the Old Testament (115). \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls9\ilvl0
\b \cf2 Chapter 6. Locating That To Which We Have Rights\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 We have rights to life-goods. \
\'93I take the good to be that which is worthy of approbation\'94 (144). \
\
We have rights to states of affairs (within our lives and histories) that \'93contribute positively to the worth of that life or history\'94 (145). \
\
But there are three kinds of \'91good life\'92. Experientially satisfying, happy, and flourishing (145). \
\
The experientially satisfying life is most at home in the utilitarian tradition, and cannot serve as a framework for Wolterstorf\'92s rights. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls9\ilvl0
\b \cf2 Chapter 7. Why Eudaimonism Cannot Serve\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 Eudaimonia \'93cannot serve\'94 as a framework for a theory of rights. Happiness is an activity (152). It is not egoism, at least not under any specific description thereof (153). \
\
Stoics treat virtue as the only good per se with preferables (like fame, wealth, good birth, good repute) as goods--kinda. The Peripatetic Aristotelians treat internals like virtue and externals like wealth and friends as goods both. \
\
\'93A theory of rights needs the idea of a person\'92s worth requiring that she be treated in certain ways. The eudaimonist speaks only of the worth of life-goods and of conditions and means for those; the worth of personas and human beings has no place in his scheme. What he says about life-goods is that they are all activities and that each of us must choose among them with the goal in mind of enhancing one\'92s own happiness. There is no room in this scheme for the worth of persons and human beings, and hence none for one\'92s right against others to their treating one a certain way on account of one\'92s worth.\'94 (179). \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls9\ilvl0
\b \cf2 Chapter 8.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls9\ilvl0
\b \cf2 Chapter 9. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb280\sa80
\ls9\ilvl0
\b \cf2 Chapter 10. \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\sb360\sa80
\ls9\ilvl0
\b \cf0 Reflections:\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 The discussion of rights as pernicious moral vocabulary is just the one I have been wanting. He cites and summarizes (in more detail than I could have) exactly the objections I have picked up from here and there. I don\'92t believe in rights. MacIntyre doesn\'92t believe in rights (
\i After Virtue, 
\i0 chp. 6 \'97 \'91Some Consequences of the Failure of the Enlightenment Project\'92). Rights only come into being with the deterioration and collapse of \'93hierarchy, teleology,\'94 a Logo-centric worldview, like buildings collapse in an earthquake. Wolterstorff acknowledges all this narrative. \
\
I\'92m not sure if the word-concept fallacy is not running riot here. If we define rights as \'93normative social relationships\'94 that emphasize the \'93patient-dimension\'94 of those norms (the one suffering wrong) rather than the \'93agent-dimension\'94 (the one doing wrong), then sure, those are Biblical things. But the primary worry I have is the secular grounding of rights he discusses in the antepenultimate chapter. \
\
He says \'93For the right order theorist, the violation of someon\'92s natural rights is never, in itself and as such, the treating of a human being with less than due respect. It is always instead an indicator of the fact that some natural law of objective obligation has been disobeyed. A partisan of right order may point to th eplight of the poor, he may say that their rights are being violated. But pointing to the victims is for him a roundabout way of calling attention to the more fundamental fact that the powerful and the well-to-do are not living up to their obligations\'94 (43). I disagree. \
\
His three criteria for interpreting Biblical teaching on inherent rights make the case easy to argue. \
\pard\tx360\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-360\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0
\f1 \cf0 \uc0\u9679 
\f0 	Is there recognition of the recipient-side, the patient-dimension? \
\ls9\ilvl0
\f1 \uc0\u9679 
\f0 	Is there recognition of human worth? \
\ls9\ilvl0
\f1 \uc0\u9679 
\f0 	Is there recognition that the worth of persons grounds how they ought to be treated?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\ls9\ilvl0\cf0 If that\'92s all that he means by rights, then fine. \
\
The argumentation throughout the book is excellent. But the places where it is most needed it is most thin. Take page 95, where he spends three short paragraphs (less than a page!) arguing the do-or-die point that the Bible indicates that \'93human beings have inherent worth... and that they thought of that worth as grounding rights\'94... He quotes Psalm 8 that man is placed in a cosmic hierarchy below angels and crowned with glory and honor and dominion. And he quotes Genesis that we ought not shed human blood because God made humankind in his own image. That\'92s it. \
\
He picks up this theme in the next chapter (5), but only gives it a page (130-1). The human beings have more value than birds (Luke 12:24, Matthew 6:26, Matt. 10:31). We are more valuable than sheep (Matt 12:11ff). To be a human being is to have human worth, according to Jesus. QED. \
\
\'93I take the good to be that which is worthy of approbation\'94 (144). Better to say I take approbation to be the good response to the good. \
\
The fact that Wolterstorff rejects Eudaimonism is interesting to me. He argues that eudaimonism \'93won\'92t serve\'94 as a framework for rights, and this cowardly, pragmatic way of phrasing it hides the judgment \'93eudaimonism is false\'94 or better, \'93It is false that happiness is our ultimate end as humans.\'94 Perhaps the conditional is that \'91if eudaimonism is true, then rights-talk is ultimately dispensable.\'92 In which case Wolterstorff wants to argue it is indispensable so there must be something false about eudaimonism; I would (as of now, prior to further reflection) \
}