{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red26\green26\blue26;}
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs38 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93Foot has also been criticised on other grounds by Phillips and Mounce, who say that her talk of internal relations already involves evaluation and not just description. For the fact or thing that is the object of the internal relation is not just a fact, but a fact assessed with respect to a norm. Pushing, for instance, is only \'91rude\'92 or \'91offensive\'92 if it is so assessed, not if \'93pure facts\'94 alone are mentioned (as, say, in a physiological account of pushing). This is proved by the con- sideration that if it were just a matter of facts agreement would eventually be reached, for the facts are \'93incontrovert- ible,\'94 but in matters of morality one soon reaches \'93deadlock\'94 (in Hudson, 1969: 232-239). 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs38 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
This argument will not work. Facts are not incontro- vertible in the sense that no one will controvert them; for not only are there commitments that some people will deny anything to maintain, there is also sheer perversity. In moral- ity perversity is more of a problem because it touches human desires and interests so closely, while science does not. Ter- rorists, for instance, who want to go on committing murder, will not be concerned to deny the impossibility of squaring the circle, but they will be concerned to deny that there is any- thing really bad about murder, or that what they are doing is really murder, no matter what one says to show the opposite. One must distinguish between \'91incontrovertible\'92 where it refers to what one can do, and where it refers to what the facts will allow. The facts of plane triangles do not allow them to have angles equal to more or less than 180\'a1, but that does not mean one cannot deny this if one so wishes. There is nothing, even in science, that is incontrovertible in this sense, but of course that does not mean there is nothing incontrovertible in it in the other sense. With respect to the phenomenon of dis- agreement, therefore, one has no reason to suppose that mor- ality is any different from science. It does, indeed, suffer more from perverse controversion than science does, but that is not surprising given how it may, and often does, cross our desires. The fact, however, that it is often controverted in this sense cannot show that it is controvertible in the other sense. One cannot, therefore, determine whether morality has to do with facts or not by adverting to \'93deadlocks\'94 in moral disagree- ments.\'94 (87-8)
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl322

\f2\fs26 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs38 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
When one turns from non-human to human contexts one again finds senses of good that a volitional analysis has to exclude. There is sometimes a difference between what we choose or desire and what is really good for us. For instance, we may take a medicine to cure a disease and in fact only make the disease worse. One would say here that a wrong 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs32 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Good and Being 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
136 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs38 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
choice had been made, and that what was chosen was bad, even though it was chosen as good. And the implication of this is that its badness was independent of our choice. The medicine was not good because we expressed ourselves in favour of it, nor has it become bad now because we have changed our minds and expressed ourselves against it; rather it was always bad for us quite independently of what we said or thought. The same goes for the medicine that should have been chosen instead, for this too was good all the time regardless of the choices made. In other words, the badness of the one and the goodness of the other were something independent, or inherent in the things themselves, and not relative to any human acts or speech. But this is just what a volitional analysis has to deny, for it does, of necessity, make good and bad relative to what people wish and say. So here also there is a sense of good, quite commonly found in the ordinary course of things, that such an analysis has to reject. 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs38 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Another non-volitional sense of good is found in the thought of Stevenson and Hare themselves. Both admitted a good that is, in some way, good as a matter of fact. For Stevenson this factual good is science, while for Hare it is something like the exercise of freedom. These goods, about which they said nothing expressly but which lay beneath the surface of their thought, are not only, even for them, factual or cognitive, but, what is more, serve as the justification or ground of the non-factual, volitional good about which they did expressly speak. 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs38 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
There is also this further point. To say something is good gives, in human contexts, a reason for doing it. But giv- ing a reason is not like issuing an imperative or expressing a favourable attitude. All these may, it is true, have in common that they direct to action, but they do not do so in the same way. An imperative does so directly, and no reason is needed for it, especially when it comes from someone in authority, as from a general to a private soldier. To express a favourable at- titude may well be to indicate one\'92s desire or wish that such and such be done, but it does not by itself constitute a reason for doing it; indeed, no volitional act however expressed does this. To give a reason, however, is to direct to action by giving 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs32 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Good and Being 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
137 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs38 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
information about what it is really worth choosing and doing. Hence saying something is good is far more like a statement (even in its logical, to say nothing of its grammatical, form) than like an imperative or an exclamation or a wish. 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs38 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
If a volitional analysis of good is inadequate, a cogni- tive analysis in terms of facts is no less so. Good cannot be taken to signify any one fact or set of facts. The goodness of a good strawberry, for instance, is not the fact that it is red or juicy, nor is the goodness of a good action the fact that it causes pleasure. Mere redness is not by itself good, or at least not always (the redness of sunburn is not), and, of course, it is a commonplace that not all pleasant actions are good. More- over, different things are said to be good for different reasons, and a property that is good here is bad there (as softness is good in a sponge but not in a hammer). 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs38 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Nor can one say that good is some peculiar fact of its own, for, as Hare has rightly pointed out, one cannot say of two things that they are exactly alike save that one is good and the other not, whereas one can say of two things that they are exactly alike save that one is yellow and the other not. Never- theless if good is not a fact or a collection of facts, the facts are not irrelevant to it. A strawberry that is not red and juicy will not usually be called a good strawberry, even though its being good is not the same as its being red and juicy; and, further, to call a thing good is generally to call it good in vir- tue of something about it, some property or properties it has 
\f1 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\uc0\u8722  
\f0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
for one calls a red, juicy strawberry good because it is red and juicy, and one calls a smooth, soft sponge good because it is smooth and soft. Good is, to revert to Hare\'92s term, super- venient: it both says more than the facts or properties of a thing, and yet it is somehow attached to, and dependent on, those facts as well. It is, indeed, just this supervenience of good that, above all, rules out a factual analysis of good. 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs38 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The conclusion one must draw from this is that, while one cannot give a volitional account of good, one cannot give a cognitive account either unless one increases the scope of the cognitive beyond that of the factual. Indeed the necessity so to increase it, if one is to give a cognitive account, may be said to be the principal message of the last chapter. For it was 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs32 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Good and Being 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
138 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs38 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
the severe reduction of knowledge, the prevalence of empiri- cist epistemological despair, that led originally to the separa- tion of good from cognition. The overcoming of this reduction is precisely what the appeal to being is meant to achieve.\'94\
\
\
\'93Moore, it is true, objects to this likening of the desirable to the visible. He argues that whereas \'91visible\'92 means \'91able to be seen\'92, \'91desirable\'92 does not mean \'91able to be desired\'92 but rather something like \'91ought to be desired\'92 or \'91deserving to be desired\'92 (1903: 67). 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93\
\
\

\f0\fs38 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
It is not enough, however, to leave the notion of good at this level of signifying being in its relation to desire. This, by it- self, might imply that, even if things are good independently of whether they are desired, there was a necessary reference in the idea of good just to that realm of being where desire is or could be found, and this might be thought to imply a reference to the human world. 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs38 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
But besides this question there are also others that arise and need to be clarified. There is, for instance, the question of the drawing power of good, or how it moves to action. While this is, in an important sense, sufficiently answered by saying good is the object of desire (for it is desire that moves to action, and so what moves desire must move to action also), there is still a need for a more particular explanation of it in human contexts. But as this is more properly dealt with in the discussion of thinking and willing it will be left to chapter 8. There is also the question of bad and evil, and of how there can be bad and evil in things if good goes along with being and if thus every being is good; and there is also the question of how there can be a good by nature, or how it is that, if everything is good, there can be a particular natural good for each thing. This second question will be taken up expressly in 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs32 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Good and Being 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
155 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs38 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
the next chapter, but certain remarks in what follows will also be relevant to it. The question of bad and evil will be taken up expressly in this chapter. 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs38 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
To come then to the question of the scope or extension of desire. The object of desire is the end or goal which desire seeks in seeking its object, and which it naturally pursues. Desire is in general a directedness towards an object, a tend- ing or even moving towards it. One does, after all, speak of the goals of movement, meaning that what the movement is a movement towards is its goal. When one talks of desire, how- ever, one generally has some consciousness or at least sen- sation in mind. One describes the tending towards objects of sensing and thinking things as their desires. But the same structure, I mean the structure of tending or moving towards objects, exists also in things that lack sensation and thought. Flowers, for instance, tend toward the sunlight (one even says they 
\f1\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
seek 
\f0\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
the sunlight), and the ordinary processes of growth that one finds in things are just the movements of these beings towards their full maturity. It is by noting these facts, namely the structure of desire and the structure of tending towards in the being of even non-conscious things, that one may admit the legitimacy of the concept of natural desire, that is of desire that exists in things as a matter of their nature, and not of any- thing conscious. And of course, the objects of these natural desires, these natural tendings towards, will be properly des- cribed as goods 
\f1 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\uc0\u8722  
\f0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
the goods of the things in question. 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs38 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
One may also look at the matter from the point of view of the ideas of the potential and the actual, and of the realisa- tion of the potential by the actual. A thing is said to be poten- tial with respect to what it can be but not yet is, and it is said to be actual with respect to what it now is or has become. But to take a thing in terms of its potentialities is to take it in its relation and directedness to the respective actualities. \'91Poten- tial\'92 simply indicates a thing under the aspect of what it can be, or of how it is disposed to being; and this just means that, qua potential, it tends towards or is directed to that particular actuality. Since this is the same structure as desire, one may say that the relation of the potential to its respective actuality is the same as the relation of desire. And given that the natural 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs32 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Good and Being 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs32 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
156 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\f0\fs38 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
world in general is a world of things that are in a state of change and becoming (things come to be and cease to be, are born, grow, decay and die), which is the state of becoming actual, or ceasing to be actual, with respect to the poten- tialities to be that each thing has, one may say that the idea of desire, in its broadest sense where it does not include also the idea of consciousness, is found throughout the natural world. Thus the idea of good, as the idea of being in the sense in which it is an object of desire, is an idea that has reference outside human contexts altogether. 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\

\f0\fs38 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
This way of understanding things has become opaque because of the dominance of empiricist thinking. In Hume, for instance, it is impossible to speak intelligibly of motion or change, and hence of the actualisation of potentialities; for change requires the permanence of the subject that undergoes change, as water endures throughout when it changes from cold to hot. For Hume, however, there is no such subject, but only a succession of ideas, each of which is complete in itself and distinct from all others. Change is, therefore, reduced to something else, namely a succession of sense data or a series of instantaneous creations and annihilations. There is no dyn- amism in any of these data; they do not develop or grow or move; they are static; they are entirely complete and fixed as what they are. The most that happens is that at one moment they are, and at the next they are not (that this follows from Hume\'92s position is evident from his discussion of space and time). To the extent that all empiricists speak of data in the same way and make them first and basic, all of them lack the sense of motion and change. To the extent, moreover, that the methodology of modern physical science is empiricist, or to the extent that, as Kant indicated, it just subsumes such empi- ricist data under models and theories and traces the propor- tions and relations of their mathematical properties, it too lacks a sense of motion, and hence has no place for the doc- trine of the actual and potential. Therefore, it is difficult, if not impossible, within the perspective of modern science to speak of the natural appetites of things. (More will be said on this issue of change and of how things have potentials to be, the realisation of which is their good, in the next chapter.) 
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
}