{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### Two Clarifying Questions\
\
We ought to pause to note two possible objections or demands for clarification.\
\
First, an interlocutor might wonder what is the point of all this emphasis on *tradition* and *rationality* in developing an account of *virtue*.  This question assumes a sharp distinction between *morality* and *rationality* and hence assumes the further distinction between a theory of *moral virtue* and a theory of rationality. To answer this, we must examine one of MacIntyre\'92s later and more mature works, which we will do in the next section. \
\
Secondly, an interlocutor might wonder which of MacIntyre\'92s concepts of \'92virtue\'92 is the primary sense of virtue?  This question assumes that Aristotle\'92s conception of virtue is at least consistent \'97 virtues are acquired human qualities (habits) that contribute to (and are at least partially constitutive of) eudaimonia, where all humans are understood to have *one* numerally identical end. \
\
On MacIntyre\'92s account, Aristotle\'92s view of eudaimonia is fatally flawed: it universalizes a particular, local, upper-class Athenian male view of human eudaimonia. Thus debunked, it is unclear whether MacIntyre wishes to replace Aristotle\'92s aspiration for a universal definition of happiness with a *different* universal aspiration or to reject the universal aspiration altogether. \
\
Instead, he discusses those qualities that contribute to the good internal to a practice are certainly skills, \'93know-how\'94, technical knowledge or what have you. But not all practices contribute to human flourishing.  Grand theft, torture, etc., are contrary to other virtues (respect for private property, kindness). Other practices can be plausibly seen as value-neutral (table tennis?). Therefore, not all MacIntyrean virtues qualify as Aristotelian virtues, in the sense that many assume virtues are beneficial to their possessor.\
\
It seems that MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue doesn\'92t even get off the ground because what qualities count as virtues are relative *not only* to practices but to traditions and one\'92s narrative conception of life. \
\
This account seems relativistic. Happiness, eudaimonia, \'93the\'94 singular human telos is relative to traditions. MacIntyre can only avoid this by arguing that some traditions are, as a whole, importantly mistaken. And this is what he does argue. \
\
The first question above is about the relation of rationality to tradition; the second about the relation of virtues to traditions. Both elicit an important response: one\'92s conception of *both* rationality *and* virtue are relative to one\'92s tradition. And if traditions are incommensurable to each other, it seems that we are left with tradition-based relativism. \
\
I return to this objection in Section 2 below. \
\
}