{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## Why these four? ##\
\
A second question we should ask and answer up front: Why these four? Certainly, these four authors are an excellent starting point, since they have each in their own way contributed to the revival of virtue ethics. But I would like to more specifically discuss why I select these four writers. \
\
There are many important and influential philosophers who have written on virtue ethics in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries: any list of "big names" would have to include Peter Geach,[@geach1977virtues] Elizabeth Anscombe,[@anscombe1958; @anscombe1957intention] Iris Murdoch,[@murdoch2013sovereignty] Martha Nussbaum,[@nussbaum1995;  @nussbaum1988non] Judith Thomson, Julia Annas,[@annas2011intelligent] Michael Thompson, Christine Swanton,[@swanton2003virtue] Michael Slote,[@slote1992morality] Rosalind Hursthouse,[@hursthouse1999] and Paul Bloomfield[@bloomfield2003moral], among others. And certainly, one could construct a worthwhile project approaching some or all of these authors. \
\
First, I select them partly because I find them the most interesting and sympathetic to my own views. Secondly, I am convinced that focusing on these four authors will provide an interesting and fruitful plan of research for years to come. Most of them are already in extended conversation with each other. For example, there are clear lines of influence from Anscombe to all these writers; from MacIntyre to Hursthouse; from Foot to McDowell, and so on. Yet for all these converging lines, there are many divergent ones. These four represent a fascinating diversity of views. Highlighting overlapping points and contrasting divergent ones promises an opportunity for illuminating connections and deeper insights into the theory of each author. \
\
Thirdly, each of these philosophers is similarly ambitious in presenting coherent yet wide-ranging theories sensitive both to normative ethical questions about virtue, happiness, goodness, human well-being, etc., and also to the foundations of virtue in moral epistemology, moral metaphysics, moral psychology, etc. MacIntyre, Foot, McDowell, and Adams each present the ethical *and* metaethical aspects of their theories as an organic whole. This ambitious kind of project Stephen Darwall simply calls "philosophical ethics\'94.[@darwall2003should] I shall say more about how these five conceive the relation between ethics and metaethics in the next chapter. }