{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://EAE7B311-2B60-4F31-8514-96F221304427"}}{\fldrslt 
\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Core thesis
\b0 \
}}\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 This dissertation defends the claim that neo-Aristotelianism is the most adequate theory of ethics because it is the most likely true, the most useful for living well, and satisfies all non-trivial criteria for a coherent naturalism. \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Moral realism
\b0 \
I treat moral realism as a \'93defeasible presumption\'94 and defend the presumption against only a few of its bitterest objections. Among realist theories of value, neo-Aristotelians can explain what needs explaining \'97 our ubiquitous evaluative thought and talk \'97 better than any other consequentialism, functionalism, physicalism, or what have you. But before neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics can win the day as 
\i the 
\i0 theory for even orthodox naturalists, its naturalistic \'93credentials\'94 must be made clear. I began by assuming naturalism to be true and questioning whether neo-Aristotelianism was sufficiently naturalistic. Now, though, I no longer find the question meaningful unless clarified. \'91Natural\'92 when clarified either means reductively physical or material, atheistic, useful, or true, so the question of naturalism is really four: is neo-Aristotelianism compatible with reductive physicalism? Atheism? Is it useful? Is it true? The answers are no, yes, yes, and yes. \
\

\b What are we trying to explain?\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 To make the case for my main thesis that neo-Aristotelianism is our best bet metaethically speaking, I must  explain why it is such a plausible 
\i primary ethical 
\i0 theory and then defend it as a 
\i metaethical theory. 
\i0 To do the first, I must gather samples of what is puzzling about our ethical and normative lives, and show neo-Aristotelianism as an excellent explanation thereof, far superior to to its rivals. To do the second, I must explore the nature and definition of naturalism. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Ethical naturalism and nihilism
\b0 \
Now, ethical naturalism is commonly taken to be a family of cognitivist moral realist views. Without the academese: values are real but belong not some supernatural or platonic realm but to nature. But ethical naturalism is also taken less commonly but I think truly to be the family of ethical theories compatible with naturalism, including some moral realisms but also non-cognitivism, error theory, expressionism. The latter group I will treat under the pejorative label of \'91nihilism.\'92 I take ethical nihilism to be false and disastrously so, but a helpful heuristic. If a view can be shown to amount to nihilism, then it can be shown to reduce to absurdity. The upshot is that not all \'91naturalisms\'92 are created equal. Or so I shall argue. \
\

\b Options\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 In explaining the many phenomena of our dappled normative discourse, we have a taxonomy of philosophical options. The first cut is between realism and anti-realism (or irrealism, or nihilism). I will argue that realism is a defeasible presumption. \
The second cut is between naturalism and non-naturalism (or anti-naturalism). I will not argue against non-naturalism but merely assume naturalism because that is my research hypothesis. \
The third cut is between ethical naturalisms. There are many, but the main options I consider are: strict or reductive naturalism (i.e., physicalism like that of Frank Jackson\'92s), and relaxed naturalism.  I shall argue against reductive naturalism.  \
The fourth cut is between varieties of relaxed naturalism: a sort of rationalistic quietism of Thomas Nagel, the scientific consequentialism of Richard Boyd and the Cornell Realists, the neo-Aristotelianism of Philippa Foot. I shall argue against quietism, and consequentialism.\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Relation of ethics to metaethics?\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 Having chosen neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics as our 
\i metaethical 
\i0 option, we must explore it as a primary ethical option. \
Normative ethical theories (about duty, virtue, pleasure, the divine will, etc.) are normally taken to be competing and non-trivially distinct from metaethical theories about what grounds duties, virtues, human pleasure, God's decrees, etc. This received wisdom is wise. And yet, to paraphrase Thomas Nagel, sanity in our metaethics is most preserved by keeping primary ethical concerns near to our mind. Ethical naturalism best \'93fits\'94 with consequentialism. Ethical non-naturalism bets \'93fits\'94 with platonism or theism. \
Virtue ethics as a primary ethical option bets fits with ethical naturalism, or so it has been treated. But I shall explore this in greater detail. \
Aristotle\'92s ethical stance in 
\i Nichomachean Ethics 
\i0 and elsewhere is highly demanding. If it gives us any direction, within a secular society or broadly naturalistic philosophical community, then we must be clear that the directions it gives are right before trying to follow them.\
And neo-Aristotlianism is compatible with theism, an option I hope to explore in future writings but shall only touch on here. \
But the metaethical question will remain: is neo-Aristotelianism 
\i naturalistic? 
\i0 The worry comes from three possible objections: is it atheistic enough or compatible with atheism? Is it too physicalistic or too biological? (For we will already have argued that physicalistic ethic is an oxymoron.)And most importantly, does it violate the continuity of nature by making humans radically discontinuous with the rest of biology, matter, and the cosmos? \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 \
How to categorize my thesis\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://54E206D8-F705-4C38-A043-AE8C7BB38D7E"}}{\fldrslt \cf0 The normative considerations in the first and last chapters might be called applied ethical. After all, we are trying to give good reasons and hear good reasons for our metaethical theory in order to *know* what to do with our ethical theories, and we care about our ethical theories (in part) because we care about our lives. We want to live well, not badly. The "metaphysics of ethics" we must do (in response to Kant and Frank Jackson) to get a hold on human nature and the norms to which we are naturally sensitive requires a bit of metaphysical legwork. And, of course, there will inevitably be some room for moral epistemology, semantics, and moral motivation. With the great danger ever present that on any of these various topics I will misstep, I trust in the reader not to scoff but to correct, not to laugh but to help me learn.  }}\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Theism and Naturalism as cosmologies
\b0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://03AD57E7-4F2E-4794-A226-B0294B2D245D"}}{\fldrslt \cf0 For even if Theory A is more plausible than Theory B within the domain of discourse of which the theories are a part, one\'92s background cosmology may determine that Theory B is the only one consistent with those beliefs. Theory B is, on that ground, more plausible all things considered. For instance, for a theist whose background beliefs include the belief that God made the world and created life, the theory of undirected biological evolution is going to be weighed against theories of directed evolution. Even if undirected evolutionary progress is more plausible within the domain of biology, the theory of directed evolution will be, for that theorist, more plausible all things considered. Or again, for an atheist whose background beliefs include the belief that the concepts and images of god/gods are products of human imagination and culture, the theory \
}}\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
}