{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red20\green20\blue20;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 ##Kant's critique of empirical ethics\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 We ought not dwell for long on Kant's metaethical project, but his critique of "empirical ethics" is helpful to my purpose. \
\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Kant\'92s Teleology\
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\f1\b0\fs60 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
12. Teleology or Deontology?\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\pardeftab720

\fs34 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93The received view is that Kant's moral philosophy is a deontological normative theory at least to this extent: it denies that right and wrong are in some way or other functions of goodness or badness. It denies, in other words, the central claim of teleological moral views. For instance, act consequentialism is one sort of teleological theory. It asserts that the right action is that action of all the alternatives available to the agent that has the best overall outcome. Here, the goodness of the outcome determines the rightness of an action. Another sort of teleological theory might focus instead on character traits. 'Virtue ethics' asserts that a right action in any given circumstance is that action a virtuous person does or would perform in those circumstances. In this case, it is the goodness of the character of the person who does or would perform it that determines the rightness of an action. In both cases, as it were, the source or ground of rightness is goodness. And Kant's own views have typically been classified as deontological precisely because they have seemed to reverse this priority and deny just what such theories assert. Rightness, on the standard reading of Kant, is not grounded in the value of outcomes or character.\
\
There are several reasons why readers have thought that Kant denies the teleological thesis. First, he makes a plethora of statements about outcomes and character traits that appear to imply an outright rejection of both forms of teleology. For instance, in 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Groundwork
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 I, he says that he takes himself to have argued that \'93the objectives we may have in acting, and also our actions' effects considered as ends and what motivates our volition, can give to actions no unconditional or moral worth\'85[this] can be found nowhere but in the principle of the will, irrespective of the ends that can be brought about by such action\'94 (4: 400). This appears to say that moral rightness is not a function of the value of intended or actual outcomes. Kant subsequently says that a categorical imperative \'93declares an action to be objectively necessary of itself without reference to any purpose\'97that is, even without any further end\'94 (4:415). A categorical imperative \'93commands a certain line of conduct directly, without assuming or being conditional on any further goal to be reached by that conduct\'94 (4:416). These certainly appear to be the words of someone who rejects the idea that what makes actions right is primarily their relationship to what good may come of those actions, someone who rejects outright the act consequentialist form of teleology. Moreover, Kant begins the 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Groundwork
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 by noting that character traits such as the traditional virtues of courage, resolution, moderation, self-control, or a sympathetic cast of mind possess no unconditional, moral worth, (4:393-94, 398-99). If the moral rightness of an action is grounded in the value of the character traits of the person who performs or would perform it, then it seems Kant thinks that it would be grounded in something of only conditional value. This certainly would not comport well with the virtue ethics form of teleology.\
\
Second, there are, deeper theoretical claims and arguments of Kant's in both the 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Groundwork
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and in the second 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Critique
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 that appear to be incompatible with any sort of teleological form of ethics. These claims and arguments all stem from Kant's insistence that morality is grounded in the autonomy of a rational will. For instance, Kant states that \'93if the will seeks the law that is to determine it anywhere else than in the fitness of its maxims for its own giving of universal law\'85heteronomy always results\'94 (4:441) If the law determining right and wrong is grounded in either the value of outcomes or the value of the character of the agent, it seems it will not be found in the fitness of the action's maxim to be a universal law laid down by the agent's own rational will. And Kant's most complete treatment of value, the second 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Critique's
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 \'93On the Concept of an Object of Pure Practical Reason\'94, appears to be a relentless attack on any sort of teleological moral theory. \'93The concept of good and evil\'94 he states, \'93must not be determined before the moral law (for which, as it would seem, this concept would have to be made the basis) but only (as was done here) after it and by means of it\'94 (5:63).\
\
A number of Kant's readers have come to question this received view, however. Perhaps the first philosopher to suggest a teleological reading was John Stuart Mill. In the first chapter of his 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Utilitarianism
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
, Mill implies that the Universal Law formulation of the Categorical Imperative could only sensibly be interpreted as a test of the consequences of universal adoption of a maxim. Several 20th century theorists have followed Mill's suggestion, most notably, R. M. Hare. Hare argued that moral judgments such as \'93Stealing is wrong\'94 are in fact universal prescriptions (\'93No stealing anywhere by anyone!\'94) And because they are universal, Hare argued, they forbid making exceptions. That in turn requires moral judgments to give each person's wellbeing, including our own, equal weight. And when we give each person's wellbeing equal weight, we are acting to produce the best overall outcome. Thus, in his view, the CI is \'93simply utilitarianism put into other words\'94 (Hare, 1993, p. 103). More recently, David Cummiskey (Cummiskey, 1996) has argued that Kant's view that moral principles are justified because they are universalizable is compatible with those principle themselves being consequentialist. Indeed, Cummiskey argues that they must be: respect for the value of Humanity entails treating the interests of each as counting for one and one only, and hence for always acting to produce the best overall outcome.\
\
There are also teleological readings of Kant's ethics that are non-consequentialist. Barbara Herman has urged philosophers to \'93leave deontology behind\'94 as an understanding of Kant's moral theory on the grounds that the conception of practical reason grounding the Categorical Imperative is itself a conception of value. Herman's idea is that Kant never meant to say that no value grounds moral principles. That, she argues, would imply that there would be no reason to conform to them. Instead, Kant thought the principles of rationality taken together constitute rational agency, and rational agency so constituted itself functions as a value that justifies moral action. (1993, 231) Herman's proposal thus has Kant's view grounding the rightness of actions in rational agency, and then in turn offering rational agency itself up as a value. Both Paul Guyer and Allen Wood have offered proposals that differ from Herman's in content, but agree on the general form of teleology that she defends as a reading of Kant. Guyer argues that autonomy itself is the value grounding moral requirements. Moral thinking consists in recognizing the priceless value of a rational agent's autonomous will, something in light of whose value it is necessary for any rational agent to modify his behavior (1998, 22-35). And Wood argues that humanity itself is the grounding value for Kant. While the second 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Critique
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 claims that good things owe their value to being the objects of the choices of rational agents, they could not, in his view, acquire any value at all if the source of that value, rational agency, itself had no value. (1999, 130; see also pp. 157-8) Finally, Rae Langton has recently argued that if Kant's theory is to be thought of as an objectivistic view, we must suppose that the value of humanity and the good will are independent of simply being the objects of our rational choices. If their value thereby becomes the source of the rightness of our actions \'97 say, our actions are right if and because they treat that self-standing value in various ways \'97 then her reading too is teleological.\
\
It is of considerable interest to those who follow Kant to determine which reading \'97 teleological or deontological \'97 was actually Kant's, as well as which view ought to have been his. A powerful argument for the teleological reading is the motivation for Herman's proposal: What rationale can we provide for doing our duty at all if we don't appeal to it's being good to do it? But a powerful argument for the deontological reading is Kant's own apparent insistence that the authority of moral demands must come simply from their being the demands of each person's own rational will, quite apart from the value that will may have. (see Schneewind, 1996, Johnson, 2007, 2008, also Reath, 1994) On the latter view, moral demands gain their authority simply because you yourself have, insofar as you are rational, willed them. Proponents of this reading are left with the burden of answering Herman's challenge to provide a rationale for having willed it. On the former view, by contrast, a rationale is at hand: because your will is, insofar as it is rational, good. Proponents of this former reading are then left with the burden of explaining how it could be the autonomy of the will alone that explains the authority of morality.\'94 ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/kant-moral/"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/kant-moral/}})\
\
MacIntyre\'92s thesis is that Kant and Mill were also ultimately emotivist (or expressivists). They mask Nietzschean self-will in the trappings of objectivity, rationality, and moral probity. The conclusion that Kant gives as a rationale for moral demands simply the fact that I myself have willed them fits MacIntyre\'92s thesis perfectly. \
\
}