{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ####MacIntyre \
\
MacIntyre's *After Virtue* tells a story. Our predecessors had an understanding of the virtues that allowed them to individually and collectively pursue the human good together. We moderns have fragmented virtue and now we are trying to put it back together again. But the problem is not just that we moderns lack virtue; we lack an understanding of virtue combined with a partial understanding of several incomplete fragments of virtue. \
\
The solution is, first, to get perspective on the problem behind the problem.  The \'93problem behind the problem\'94 is the Enlightenment abandonment of telos for individual human persons and whole human communities or political units all directed towards one shared human good, the personal and political virtues being in this frame the means to that telos. The solution to that is the personal and political restoration of a shared conception of a good \'97 better yet, a shared recognition of the real good \'97 and a realignment with the broadly Aristotelian tradition in cultivating the virtues that are by definition means to that telos. \
\
\
MacIntyre is clear that the loss of telos in our worldview is the loss of truth. So why would an ethical framework appeal to Aristotelianism without telos? I can't see any good reason. One reason that is not a *good* reason is that we have been bullied to reject certain scientific truths by a dogmatic philosophical minority. Is it too bold to respond to such bullying by... just saying no? I revisit this question below. \
\
\
}