{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 How I deal with objections\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 One reason I love reading Plato is that he never builds straw men. Not all dialogists in the history of philosophy have been purely intellectually honest. But Plato's characters are almost always real like Shakespeare's characters are real. They may be ridiculous -- especially the interlocutors, but Socrates too-- they may be mad, they may be uproariously funny, but they are always real. They are funny in the way real interlocutors are funny. They are ridiculous the way some of my undergraduates are ridiculous. They are mad the way some in my own family are mad. Plato's passion for giving the devil his due lead him to write (or one of his very gifted students to write) dialogues in which Socrates "loses". In *Cleitophon*, the eponymous character -- not Socrates -- gets the last word. If Plato intends his reader to disagree with Cleitophon, if he intends the reader to see the error in Cleitophon's thinking or in his character, that intention is buried layers deep in an intention to let Cleitophon speak with authenticity. Cleitophon's error, if he is in error, must be shown in the clearest relief, the brightest light, his own arguments through his own words in his own voice. The reader has to do the work to unbury the error. Or, finding the error, to let the dead bury their own dead. \
\
While writing a platonic dialogue is a form of art I still find appealing and still use, that is not the best vehicle for this dissertation. So I am forced to give the views I think mistaken the best hearing I can give them in my own voice. \
\
The challenge of metaethical inquiry, I think, is to engage readers who do not already agree with you. A constant danger to which we are all liable is assuming too many crucial propositions and arguing at length about a bunch of relatively peripheral propositions. Metaethicists who steer clear of this danger are the likes of Alan Gibbard and Robert Adams. There is some value to articulating, clarifying, and defending a view that reader and author both (already) share. But that is not the valuable enterprise I aim for. \
\
The test, I think, shall be whether these pages find readers who disagree with the core thesis I present in Chapter 3, and, if so, whether they can recognize "their own" purported view in the pages that follow. If they can not only recognize but resoundingly affirm the view expressed in that chapter, then my objections may have some bite and may earn the high honor of receiving a rebuttal. \
\
It would not be a failure if no one found these pages; most such essays do not find readers, even if they deserve them. Failure would be for some ethical naturalist to pick up the book or a chapter on a shelf or online, glance at the view expressed, and to disown what I claim is his own. \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 My own views\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 I speak from within a tradition. The term \'91tradition\'92 is one of those that is so broad as to be very useful for painting with broad strokes, but occasionally useless or harmful. By \'91tradition\'92 I mean that I am a born-again California Orthodox Christian. But I also occupy a broader tradition, that of virtuous pagans like Aristotle. I am an Aristoteliean, not in that I agree with every jot and tittle of his complete works, but in that I and many if not all westerners are descendants of the Greco-Roman culture that survives in Europe and America, and has in many respects spread to Asia, Africa, Russia, Australia and the world. \
Only in a{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://EE733AC2-A7E7-4D5D-98EB-FE58057A6460"}}{\fldrslt  final chapter }}do I revisit some of these questions from the unique vantage point offered by the Christian narrative, which is just the vantage point offered by seeing all of Christ\'92s creation (especially ourselves) in light of Christ. In this and in the subsequent chapters leading up to that final one, I restrict myself to the Aristotelian tradition. Firstly, I wish to seek common ground with my atheist, rationalist, or humanist readers who share with me not a common faith but a common civilization. Secondly, I wish to find out as much about nature and human nature by the light of reason, philosophical reflection on experience, and empirical study.\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 Traditions\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1\slminimum320

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
I count this as An exercise in American Ethics. any philosophy that claims to be American must be in some way pragmatist. But method over doctrine doctrine means that the doctrines are fluid, flexible, in process, evolving. So those who resist my conclusions must either refute them or be branded enemies of progress. For a methodological naturalist who is consistent to deviate from the present orthodoxy is not a complaint but a necessary project demanded by present orthodoxy. Just as to be a single called organism is to cease being single called but become multicelled, to be human is to become transhuman.\'a0\
\
I count this as an exercise in Athenian thinking without the benefit of \'a0Jerusalem. A Greco-roman-euro-American philosophy.\
\
My audience are not those like me who not only trust and admire but also worship and obey Jesus. My audiences are those who admire but do not worship, trust but do not obey. \'a0These might be agnostic, spiritual but not religious, or atheistic. But I do not presume atheism in this work. I presume that all evidences, physical, psychological and social are on the table. All experience and all science and all reason are for me sources, but no revelation other than the revelation of reason.\
\
I hope in future work to explore those questions of especial interest to us who have more resources available to answering them, like Alvin Plantinga and Robert Adams.\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b \cf0 A double danger\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0 \cf0 My goal is not to write from within my tradition as a theist and indeed a Christian. The resources available for thinking about virtue are much greater. Rather, if the church to which I belong is a citadel on the hill, and the broader western tradition is a city spread out like a wheel on the surrounding terrain, my goal is to leave the citadel and see how much work can be done in the city. Outside the city, of course, are the villages, towns, and countryside homes. And beyond that, wilderness. I shall not have much to say to the wild men who are utter moral strangers. \
The double danger of limiting myself to what can be said about virtue and nature from within a public and secular tradition is that both audiences are liable to misunderstand me: fellow theists or fellow Christians in particular may assume that I ignore the extra resources available to me out of disbelief or ignorance; fellow westerners who do belong or might belong to the tradition of Aristotle will assume that I consider the more narrow domain of secular discourse as a means of proselytizing for my faith, inching towards God. Both sides may think me either disingenuous or misguided. This is a danger that can be mitigated by explicit avowals of my true intentions. But such misunderstandings cannot be wholly guarded against. I think the reward is worth the risk. To detail neo-Aristotelianism and to give a novel account of naturalism that both theists and atheists or agnostics can consider, modify, and in part accept, is worth all the trouble. \
}