{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 HoeflerText-Regular;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc3\levelnfcn3\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{upper-alpha\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\})}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'02\'00);}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\})}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'02\'00);}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}
{\list\listtemplateid5\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}\levelprepend{\leveltext\leveltemplateid401\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}\levelprepend{\leveltext\leveltemplateid402\'02\'01.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid5}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}{\listoverride\listid5\listoverridecount0\ls5}}
\deftab720
\pard\tqr\tx8640\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Is normativity natural? Are normative facts part of nature?  This essay presents a case in the affirmative.\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\super \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub  To call such a case \'91unpopular\'92 is an understatement on the level of calling log cabins \'91out of fashion.\'92 \
Nevertheless, section 1 makes a presumptive argument in favor of natural normativity. Natural normative truths can be expressed in Aristotelian Categorical statements of the form \'91all As \uc0\u966 .\'92 Such Aristotelian are normative/descriptive statements about normative/descriptive natural facts. Believing such natural normative facts exist is the best explanation of both \'93teleonomical\'94 phenomena in non-human nature and teleological phenomena in human nature. Simply put, if all eyes see, then there are natural normative facts. And all eyes see. So there are natural normative facts; nature is normative. \
Section 2 replies to a battery of powerful objections to this simple argument. Beyond risking mockery by swimming against such a tide of philosophical orthodoxy, the defender of natural normativity must answer at least five substantive scientific and philosophical objections that frankly seem devastating. Even so, none warrant denying the appearances. Rather, much of the force of these objections comes from the power of suggestion and specious appeals to authority rather than substance. By contrast, the evidence for natural normativity is fairly straightforward, and each thinker can examine it for herself. \
\
\pard\tqr\tx8640\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Section 1  \'97 Nature is Normative\
\
Preliminary Assumptions
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
First, I should say that I take my thesis to be 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
naturalistic
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 in the broad sense: I am using philosophical and broadly scientific methods in an attempt to observe and explain natural phenomena, and bracketing divine revelation or the existence of supernatural beings. Furthermore, my thesis is naturalistic in that one important governing assumption of ethical naturalism is that humans are continuous with nature (Brown 2009). I shall assume rather than argue that if normative facts are real, then they are natural facts. \
Secondly, I shall build my argument on Aristotle, Philippa Foot (2003), and Thomas Nagel (2012). I take my readings of Aristotle and Nagel to be conservative; my reading of Foot, on the other hand, extends a bit farther into metaphysical speculation than she herself (following Wittgenstein) would be interested in going. 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tqr\tx8640\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Thirdly, a definitional preliminary: what is a norm or a normative fact? (I shall use the terms interchangeably). A normative fact "is what corresponds to a true normative statement" (Schaber 2012). For reasons of space, I ask you join me in assuming normative realism. \
On normative realism, value-statements, reason-statements, and ought-statements are refer to different normative facts. For example, \'94You ought not hit strangers with a skateboard" is a moral statement, but obviously, not every \'91ought\'92 is a 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
moral
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 ought (Thomson 2001). "You ought to drink some hot lemonade" is a prudential norm (Thomson 2001). Drinking the hot lemonade is something you aspire to, rather than a description of how you are behaving. If you do not, your throat may remain sore. \
Importantly, not every norm explicitly contains 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
the word 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
'ought
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
'
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. For example, "Eyes are for seeing," is a description of their function, purpose, or the end-directed activity of that system. "Eyes are for seeing" is a normative 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
and 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
descriptive statement -- that's what eyes do 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
and 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
what they ought to do. Eyes that cannot see are defective qua eye. "Wolves hunt in packs" is a normative and descriptive statement. \
Norms are thus related to 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
teloi, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
functions, ends, goals, final causes, laws, etc.\
\pard\tqr\tx8640\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1

\f1 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
By contrast, the denial of 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
actual 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
ends in nature we may call 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
teleological nihilism 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
(Barham 2014). Teleological nihilism comes in two varieties: a weak version affirms that humans engage in end-directed behavior by rational reflection and autonomous choice, but denies 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
natural ends 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
for non-human creatures like wolves or sub-human organs like eyes; a strong version denies even that human behavior that is apparently end-directed is in fact so end-directed.\
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://F3BAEAC7-06B3-4D1D-BB12-59F6899C70E7"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
I have argued above for the weak version. Below is the strong version.\
}}\pard\tqr\tx8640\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1

\f0\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
The Structure of the Argument\
\pard\tqr\tx8640\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The basic structure of the argument is this: there are two phenomena, two natural facts, that are best explained by the reality of natural normative facts. If those two natural facts are real, then norms are part of nature \'97 nature is normative. \
Consider the two natural facts: the first is end-directed (teleonomic) behavior of natural entities (eyes see, trees grow, stomachs digest); the second is the essentially normative (teleological) cognitive and practical activity of natural humans. It is of course not as controversial to think that 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
humans
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 act for ends, that we 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
rationally direct 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
our actions. So I shall spend make my case for the more controversial thought that even non-human organisms and organs or body parts (like eyes) are naturally normative.\
The best explanation of each of these facts, and of both together, is that nature is normative. We could also say that there are natural teleological laws, natural norms, final causes, natural ends, natural functions, natural goals, etc. \
\
\pard\tqr\tx8640\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Aristotelian Categoricals 
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Let\'92s return to the statement, \'94Wolves hunt in packs.\'94 This is a statement Foot calls an Aristotelian Categorical (Foot 2002). An Aristotelian categorical's logical form is neither universal nor particular. That is, to assert that all A's \uc0\u966  is not to distribute \u966 -ing to all members of the category A, nor simply to assert that 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
some 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A's that we have observed were observed \uc0\u966 -ing. \
For example, "all reptiles lay eggs" as universal categorical statement admits no exceptions.  The discovery of a new reptile, say, that gives live birth would not be the discovery of a 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
defective
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 reptile, but a discovery of a new species of reptile. Or rather, it would mean that 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
either
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 this newly discovered creature is not a reptile 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
or 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
that not all reptiles lay eggs. On the other hand, modestly confining oneself to a particular categorical statement like "some reptiles lay eggs" would be radically unambitious science. Our sample size of reptiles that lay eggs is enormous; we are justified in making the inductive leap that 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
all reptiles lay eggs. 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Aristotelian Categoricals, then, are neither simply universal nor simply particular categorical descriptions. They are normative/descriptive judgments. \
And they are also formed by observation and induction. For example, we observe that many As do indeed \uc0\u966 , and we infer that A 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
is supposed to 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\uc0\u966 , A 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
is for 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\uc0\u966 -ing.  Categorical are inductive generalizations with a normative character.  We have observed a sample of A's \u966 -ing and we 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
inductively infer 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
that (perhaps) 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
all 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A's \uc0\u966 . \
On the basis of the generalization, the observation that a particular A does not \uc0\u966  does not refute a simply, universal predication but identifies a defect in that particular A. When we observe an exception to a categorical we do not ipso fact debunk our categorical nor are obliged to re-interpret our observation. When learn that all wolves (say) hunt in packs, and observe a wolf hunting alone, we do not debunk the principle that wolves hunt in packs. (Nor do we think that we have discovered a new species of canine that is morphologically and genetically identical to a wolf!) Rather, we have observed that not all wolves are doing what they are supposed to do, not all wolves perfectly exemplify their lifeform.\
\

\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Nature is Normative: The Presumptive Case \
\pard\tqr\tx8640\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The presumptive case for natural normativity consists of two short arguments. Argument (A) delivers normative facts from the truth of our normative, the logical structure of Aristotelian Categoricals and the assumed normative realism; argument (B) simply concludes that such normative facts are natural. \
 \
\pard\tx740\tx1132\tqr\tx8640\pardeftab720\li392\fi327\sl360\slmult1
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	A.	}
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Argument for Normative Facts\
\pard\tqr\tx8640\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1

\i0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1)	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
If a normative statement is true, then it corresponds to a normative fact. (Normative realism)\
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2)	}
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
All eyes see
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is a true normative statement. (From observation and induction). \
\ls2\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3)	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Therefore, 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
all eyes see
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 corresponds to a normative fact. (From 1-2)\
\pard\tqr\tx8640\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tqr\tx8640\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1

\i \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
B. Argument for Natural Normative Facts. \
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl360\slmult1
\ls3\ilvl0
\i0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1)	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
If a true normative statement is about real, natural entities, then there are natural normative facts. (Naturalism)\
\ls3\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2)	}
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
All eyes see
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is a true normative statement about a natural entity.   (From observation)\
\ls3\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3)	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Therefore, there are natural normative facts. (from 1-2)\
\pard\tqr\tx8640\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Argument (A) assumes normative realism for premise 1.  We learn premise 2 from observation and induction: an Aristotelian Categorical descriptive/normative statement: 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
eyes see
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 and 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
eyes are for seeing 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
and 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
eyes ought to see
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 (stomachs are supposed to digest, wolves hunt in packs, humans ought to think rationally, or what have you). (I) delivers conclusion (3), that there are normative facts. Then, argument (B) provides a simple variation on (A). True normative statements about natural entities correspond to real natural facts. Such normative facts are 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
natural 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
and not merely human, psychological, or projected. And (2) is, I take it, obviously normative and about a natural entity (not something man-made). So (B) delivers our thesis, that there are natural normative facts. \
\
\pard\tqr\tx8640\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Section 2 \'97 Objections
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Let's consider just a few of the many possible powerful objections to this line of thinking. \
The first point is not truly an objection, but a challenge: if the doctrine of natural norms is so unpopular, then it is probably false. If it were true, wouldn't more scientists believe it? More philosophers of science? More philosophers? Well, philosophical fashions come and go. Perhaps this particular fashion of denying natural normativity rests on a mistake. If the arguments like the above are sound, then perhaps natural normativity is destined to become the new, justified, scientific and philosophical orthodoxy. Secondly, for those who care about fashion, Aristotelian cosmology 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
is
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 making a come back. 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx20\tx412\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\li392\fi-393\sl360\slmult1
\ls4\ilvl0
\b0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The first substantive objection is that it is false that 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
all eyes see, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
if taken as a teleological statement like 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
eyes are for seeing 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
or 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
eyes are supposed to see, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
or 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
eyes are naturally directed toward seeing. 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Some will say, "Eyes that do not see died out; eyes that see were preserved naturally." \
\pard\tx360\tx752\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\li752\fi-753\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl1\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	0.1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
As far as I can tell, evolutionary backstories about what eyes are and what eyes do has nothing to do with whether they have a real, end-directed function. There is disagreement about whether explanations 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
undermines 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
or 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
underwrites 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
teleological explanations (Mayr 1974, Brown 2009). All that I need for my argument to work is that 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
possibly 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
evolutionary backstories underwrite natural teleology. The only reason to assume that 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
natural selection itself, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
which produces teleonomic phenomena,
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is undirected
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 by natural teleology is dogma. If so, call me a heretic. \
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	0.2.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
But is it really possible to doubt that eyes are for seeing? That eyes see is an empirical observation. That eyes 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
ought 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
to see, that eyes that cannot see are defective, is, I insist, equally empirical. It is just as empirical and no more theory-laden than other scientific observations like "all reptiles lay eggs." \
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	0.3.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
I save one more response to this objection in the last objection.\
\pard\tx20\tx412\tx720\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\li392\fi-393\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A second objection is to cling to an image. On one very powerful picture of the world, nature is a realm of pure descriptive facts, "bald", "disenchanted," and physical (McDowell 1996). Nature is an interlocking system of relations, spatial, temporal, and causal. Nature is "the world of quantity, as against the world of quality; of objects as against consciousness... of efficient causes (or, in some modern systems, of no causality at all) as against final causes." (Lewis 1947). Call this the Laplacian picture (Plantinga 2011). On this picture which arrogates itself as 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
the 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
scientific picture, norms are final causes, 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
teloi, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
ways, and hence must be 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
merely 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
psychological or belief in them is unscientific. \
\pard\tx360\tx752\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\li752\fi-753\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl1\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1.1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
By all means, let us be scientific. I have an unwavering pro-attitude toward whatever earns the honorific title of science. If teleological laws are not discovered by scientific methods, then normative facts remain mere hypotheses or pragmatic assumptions or unshakable illusions. But the fact that
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 eyes really are for seeing
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 is evidence against the Laplacian picture of the world and hence the Laplacian monopoly on the term \'91science.\'92 That eyes are for seeing supports rather the Aristotelian picture of nature as including all four causes, and science as studying all four. Hence, natural normativity is scientific, and its denial is unscientific. Natural normativity is even empirical, and its denial is dogmatically unempirical.  \
\pard\tx20\tx412\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\li392\fi-393\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A third objection. The existence of natural teleology depends heavily on inferences to the best explanation. But "best" explanation depends in part on background beliefs. If one of our background beliefs is that we believe on good inductive evidence from scientific methods, that there are no natural norms, then appeal to normative facts to explain apparent normative truths like "eyes are for seeing" is blocked. So, on best scientific methods, we must deny the appearances: either normative realism is false, or normative natural facts are merely descriptive with the illusion of normativity. \
\pard\tx360\tx752\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\li752\fi-753\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl1\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2.1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
This objection may be taken two ways, and both are refutable: Firstly, it might be using the locution "scientific methods" but referring to a philosophical 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
doctrine, namely, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
the dogma that Laplacian nature is not normative. Well, I deny the dogma on the basis of the Presumptive Case above. Secondly, this objection might mean that inference to the best explanation (IBE) is not a part-and-parcel of the scientific method.  But it is. Scientists 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
do 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
use inference to the best explanation (abduction, hypotheses, explanation). It is, as far as I can tell, the reason we believe in electrons (Enoch 2009). IBE is in fact, ineliminable part of the scientific method. \
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2.2.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
IBE the kind of inference we used. The explanation of teleological phenomena (by teleological laws) may be 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
wrong 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
but it is not in the wrong ball park. It may be 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
unscientific 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
in the sense any false datum or theorem is unscientific. But it is not non-scientific the way Cinderella movies or street lights are non-scientific.\
\pard\tx20\tx412\tx720\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\li392\fi-393\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A fourth, and also very different objection. Stephen Brown objects that arguments from an observation that A \uc0\u966 's to the conclusion that A 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
ought to 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\uc0\u966  prove too much, since it can be applied not only to non-humans but to non-living things. For example, we could "prove" that our hydrogen star is 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
for 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
radiating energy to the earth; the sun engenders life so therefore it is 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
supposed to 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
engender life. But this seems absurd: the sun does not have a purpose, a natural normativity. This is an objection about scope: if there are norms in terrestrial nature, do they extend to the whole cosmos? My presumptive case argues are really real and really natural but may be taken to prove only that norms exist for organic natural entities.\
\pard\tx360\tx752\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\li752\fi-753\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl1\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3.1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
On the one hand, I am perfectly content to rest my case. If I have persuaded you of a more modest conclusions, that normative laws obtain only in humans; or they obtain only in living organisms, or even more ambitiously, that they obtain only in organic systems (both organisms and their organs). \
\pard\tx360\tx752\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\li752\fi-753\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl1\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3.2.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
On the other hand, Thomas Nagel (2012) makes the case in 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Mind and Cosmos 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
that teleological (and hence normative) laws are natural to the cosmos as a whole, including inorganic matter. \
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3.3.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
I think there are two good reasons to be maximally ambitious about natural normativity. They are both reductios: suppose that there are natural normative facts about 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
only 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
organic entities, not non-living entities like the soil and the sun. Then we must affirm that when life appeared on earth, a 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
new kind of case 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
appeared as well: final causes. A new natural fact that was never there before, normative natural facts appear. For 13 billion years prior, there was only chance and efficient/material causes. Suddenly, and accidentally, the universe produced not only a new entity but a new kind of fact: normative facts. This sounds to me absurd, though if it does not sound so to you, I'm not sure how to persuade you otherwise. It makes more sense, I think, to suppose that natural normativity was there from the Big Bang forward. \
\ls5\ilvl1\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3.4.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A second reductio: In the first objection, we considered that natural selection undermines the appearance of teleology. The problem is that natural selection does not apply to inorganic entities and systems like the soil, the sun, and the stars. There is no interstellar process analogous to genetic drift and the extinction of maladaptive traits. This also sounds to me absurd. The alternative, then, is more likely true: natural norms just are features of all of nature. Teleological normative laws are another brute kind of natural laws. \
\pard\tx20\tx412\tx720\tx1120\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\li392\fi-393\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl0\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	4.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A fifth and final objection. Some will take this whole argument, which began assuming normative realism, and concluded with normative natural laws, as a reductio ad absurdum about normative realism. What better expression of why we should be norm-expressivists like Alan Gibbard? Normativity is only \'93natural\'94 to humans, not to all of nature. We, as a species, are different from all of Laplacian nature, capable of advanced cognition and practice. So why not just explain the appearance of natural norms, of final causes, of purposes, of natural ends, by a combination natural selection and human projection? We are projecting our insides onto nature's insides. When really, nature has no "inside," no subjectivity, no consciousness. \
\pard\tx360\tx752\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\li752\fi-753\sl360\slmult1
\ls5\ilvl1\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	4.1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Strangely enough, such an explanation divorces humanity from nature. It makes humans mysterious, radically discontinuous, opaque, anomalous, and queer. Since I am here assuming that humans are continuous with nature, I reject an account of teleology that makes it natural only to humans but unnatural to the cosmos as a whole. Furthermore, I have studiously avoided using too many uncontroversial examples of human normativity, preferring the more controversial (and hence more interesting) examples of non-human normative facts.\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\pardeftab720\sl360\slmult1

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Implications for Metaethics
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tqr\tx8640\pardeftab720\fi720\sl360\slmult1
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
What is particularly exciting to me about natural normativity, if it is true, is its implication for ethics. If non-human stuff of the cosmos (quasars and comets) and the human stuff of the cosmos (you and me) share a common normative structure, then this might be what underwrites many ethical claims.\
 Julia Annas puts it this way:  "What is so helpful for ethics from this kind of biological naturalism is that we find that the normativity of our ethical discourse is not something which emerges mysteriously with humans and can only be projected back, in an anthropomorphic way, onto trees and their roots. Rather, we find normativity in the realm of living things, plants and animals, already..." (Annas 2005).\
 Natural normativity underwrites the belief that non-human nature and human nature share a common structure. This is just what ethical naturalism predicts. Ethical living is when we aim to become what we ought to become. Promise-keeping, rationality, prudence, moderation, perseverance, can be plausibly presented as traits that enable us to become what we are already are and what we ought to be. }