{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f2\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red20\green20\blue20;\red120\green9\blue17;}
\deftab720
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Ethical Context\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Philosophical ethics aims to \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93identify, articulate, and defend general moral principles that serve to explain when and why various types of action, institutions, or characters count as right or wrong, just or unjust, virtuous or vicious\'85[assuming, of course, that] there is a general and principled account of morality to be given.\'94 (Sayre-McCord 2014).  \
Modern moral philosophies (defining \'93modern\'94 as Enlightenment secular moralities) that do not debunk morality entirely have tended to be either Kantian or Utilitarian. So, for a Kantian deontologist, some one or few principles of pure practical reason provide categorical normative obligation to do some actions (e.g., always treat other moral agents as ends in themselves, never merely as a means to an end). For a Millian utilitarian consequentialist, the one moral principle is to maximize happiness. Act-utilitarians recommend that the hedonic calculus, at least in theory, be applied to each act; rule-utilitarians only that it be applied to general types of action. \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
All three of these philosophical ethics may be contrasted with non-philosophical (or non-systematic) ethics, with \'93folk morality\'94 or \'93common morality,\'94 (Beauchamp and Childress). Common morality, it is claimed, is a superficial but nigh-universal set of moral precepts, hunches, intuitions, commitments, and beliefs that are surprisingly widespread and trans-cultural. Items of the common morality include a \'93primal platitudes\'94 like keeping one\'92s promises, not murdering, honoring elders, doing good, and so on. (Some ethical philosophers defend non-systematic ethics [Chappell 2009; Chappell 2014]). \

\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 John Arras says: \'93\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Normative ethical theories vary considerably in terms of their aspirations towards generalization, universality, abstractness, systematic organization, simplicity, and comprehensiveness (Nussbaum 2000, Flynn 2007). Paradigmatic examples of what we'll call \'93high moral theory\'94 attempt to embody most or all of these defining characteristics. Thus classical utilitarianism, Kantian deontology, and Rawlsian justice as fairness, for example, all strive for the articulation of a theoretical system based upon a small number of abstract fundamental principles (e.g., Mill's principle of utility, Kant's categorical imperative, and Rawls's famous two principles of justice) that they regard as the \'93keys\'94 to understanding the moral or political life. These principles in their pristine incarnations are capable of being articulated in a perfectly general and universal fashion without any reference to or dependency upon any particular social practices or cultural norms. They apply, so their authors tell us, to all rational agents as such.[{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/theory-bioethics/notes.html#14"}}{\fldrslt \cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
14}}] Beginning from these highly abstract and universally binding moral norms, standard examples of high moral theory ramify into complex systems encompassing basic and derivative moral principles (e.g., respect the autonomy of rational agents), rules based upon such principles (e.g., do not enlist patients in biomedical research without first gaining their informed consent), and, finally, judgments animated by such principles and rules bearing on particular cases (e.g., the Tuskegee syphilis study was unethical).\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl288\slmult1
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Although most philosophers might naturally think of such highly abstract and ambitious constructions as paradigmatic examples of moral theory, and most likely have precisely such theories in mind when asked about the relationships between bioethics and ethical theory, they do not exhaust the space of normative theorizing either in bioethics or within the moral life more generally.\'94 (John Arras, \'93Theory and Bioethics\'94, 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, (
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Summer 2013 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).
\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
	\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Virtue ethics is a nice combination of philosophical and common morality (Annas 2011). \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	My account is an attempt to strike a balance between high and common. Such attempts are fraught with danger. The high aims for truth, systematicity, simplicity, elegance; the common aims for usefulness, practicality, complexity to match the rough and tumble of situational ethics, and ruggedness. These two sets of aims are either incompatible 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
or only compatible barely. 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Virtue ethics is a commonly seen as alternative to and rival of Kantianism and consequentialism. So for a virtue ethicist, the most general principle is that one should always do whatever the (ideally) virtuous agent would do (Hursthouse 1999). \
In contrast to the picture of virtue ethics as a distinct and competing rival, some have argued that virtue talk can be combined with another modern moral philosophy to create a \'93virtue theory\'94. So virtue ethicists can be consequentialists (Hurka 2001). Virtues are those traits that contribute to the best overall consequences. Or virtue ethicists can be deontologists: virtues are those traits that enable us to do our duty, or doing our duty builds in us virtues. \
Finally, we can contrast modern secular moralities with religious moralities. I call a morality religious if it is wholly or partially rooted in a sacred text, or sees divine commands as inherently binding. Virtue ethics has been appropriated by various religious moralities, but has also been at home in a variety of 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
weltenshuaangs, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
from deistic or pantheistic to secular and atheistic. While the philosophical virtue ethics I shall be defending is ecumenical with regard to atheism and theism, I shall return to the metaphilosophical issue of theism in the last chapters. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Metaethical Context\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200

\b0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
We must also say a few words about the metaethical context of philosophical ethics. \
Metaethics is the branch of ethics that examines the foundations of \'93moral talk, thought, and practice\'94 (Sayre-McCord 2014). We might follow Mark Schrader in dividing metaethical topics according to the relation of moral topics to the \'93core questions\'94 of philosophy: metaphysics, anthropology, epistemology, semantics, (and I would add, metaphilosophy). \
The question in moral metaphysics is whether moral facts are real or not? If not, then either some brand of constructivism is true or nihilism (Mackie 1973). If so, then moral realism is true (Shafer-Landau 2006). Virtue ethicists tend to be moral realists. But some argument is obviously needed to establish the thesis that there are moral facts about which moral discourse can (and often does) denote.\
A further question in moral metaphysics is, if there are moral facts and moral truths, whether they are brute facts or underwritten by some further (non-moral) fact? This is the question of constructivism. If they are brute facts, then this is what Shafer-Landau (2006) calls  \'93stance-independent\'94 moral realism since the moral facts do not depend for their reality on the beliefs or attitudes of any actual or ideal moral agent or group (Wielenburg 2009; Nagel 2012). If moral facts do so depend, we have one of many kinds of stance-dependent constructivism, either an ideal agent (Hursthouse 1999), an ideal group (Rawls 1971; {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://C0451F86-718A-45FD-9183-1038AC66D29B"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Railton 1986}}; Harman 1975; {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://CFA9E488-CBF0-4327-A6D5-BC464C960BF4"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Copp 1995}}), an actual agent (Lenman 2010), pure practical reason itself (Korsgaard 1986), or any two or more agents who agree with each other in an explicit or implicit contract ({\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "scrivcmt://B8BA96BC-5D8C-4C43-85B7-AF46A28788EB"}}{\fldrslt \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Scanlon 1998).}}\
The question of constructivism is crucial within the debate over neo-Aristotelian metaethical accounts of virtue. Hursthouse considers herself a realist; by Shafer-Landau\'92s lights, she is an anti-realist. \'93\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
[C]onstructivism in ethics is the view that there are normative truths about what one ought to do, but they depend on how rational agents would reason in an idealized deliberative situation\'94 (Bagnoli 2011). 
\f2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\'93Realists agree that (a) moral discourse shares the same semantics as non-moral discourse, (b) there are moral properties, such as rightness, (c) moral properties are sometimes instantiated, and (d) moral predicates express properties. But there is a disagreement whether in order to be a form of realism, a theory must hold a stronger claim that (e) moral properties and moral relations are \'93mind-independent\'94 (Dancy 1986).\'94 (Bagnoli 2011)
\f0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 We must first ask whether such distinctions are merely stipulative. If so, we can note the substantive agreement and dispense with labels. If not, though, we must enter the details of the disagreement about whether moral facts are brute facts or grounded in a deeper (non-moral) fact (as Hursthouse argues), like the judgment of a fully virtuous agent. In this, Hursthouse claims to be following Aristotle who defines the good life in terms of virtuous rational agency (
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Nicomachean Ethics, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
V, 1 1129b2-7, III 4 113a32)\
Another sub-question within moral metaphysics is whether moral facts are \'93natural\'94 facts? If so, then ethical naturalism is true. If not, then ethical non-naturalism is true. But some have argued that this distinction is not all that important (Shafer-Landau 2003). Even if ethical naturalism is true, we have some work to do. It might be that moral facts are type-type identical to some natural facts (Jackson 1998); or that moral facts are one type of familiar of natural kind (Boyd 1988); or that they are grounded in human nature (Brown 2009). Since neo-Aristotelianism is offered as a species of moral naturalism, I shall elaborate on it in the next section. \
The main question in moral semantics is whether moral terms refer, whether moral judgments are \'93truth-apt\'94 or truth evaluable. If there are no moral facts then non-cognitivists offer a compelling explanation of how we use moral language. Moral terms do not 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
refer 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
but 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
express. 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
They do not describe objects but express something important about subjects (our norms, our feelings, our recommendations). But of course, we cannot assume moral nihilism. If moral facts do exist, then the most likely explanation of our moral language is that it refers to those facts. (Alternately, cognitivist error-theorists accept that our moral judgments are truth-evaluable and that moral terms refer but deny that they successfully describe any moral facts.)\
The main question in moral epistemology is whether moral knowledge (conceived as knowledge of moral facts) is possible, and if so, how. If we learn by the same kind of basic rational capacity by which we know that modus ponus is valid and that three times three makes nine, then we may call this moral rationalism (Shafer-Landau 2003). If we learn, rather, of moral facts by the same kind of basic empirical observation by which we know that grass is green or metals conductible, then we can call this moral empiricism (Boyd).  If we learn of moral facts by a special moral intuition, contrasted with familiar rational and empirical methods, we can call this moral intuitionism (Moore 1903; Audi 2009). And finally, if we simply do not have moral knowledge, if we are massively mistaken in our judgments within the moral domain, then error-theory is true. \
A further question within moral rationalism is whether reason identifies or constructs moral truths. Contrast the substantive view of rationality with the procedural view of rationality: \'93\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Among contemporary philosophers, Christine Korsgaard has developed the most ambitious, and controversial, version of Kantian constructivism. She defines Kantian constructivism as a form of \'93procedural realism\'94\'97the view that \'93there are answers to moral questions 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
because
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 there are correct procedures for arriving at them\'94; and she contrasts procedural realism with \'93substantive realism\'94\'97the view that \'93there are correct procedures for answering moral questions 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
because
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 there are moral truths or facts, which exist independently of those procedures, and which those procedures track\'94 (Korsgaard 1996a, 36\'9637; see also Engstrom 2009, 119).\'94 (Bagnoli 2011)\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Finally, and crucially, the question within moral motivation and action is whether moral reasons are necessarily motivating. If so, then moral internalism about moral reasons is true; necessarily, when I identify a moral reason for \uc0\u966 -ing I am motivated to \u966 . If not, then moral externalism is true; I can have a moral reason to \u966  but not necessarily be motivated to \u966 . \
A further sub-question within moral motivation is whether moral reasons are a special kind of practical reason or not. According to reasons internalism, having a practical reason to \uc0\u966  necessarily means I am motivated to \u966 . So I might have a 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
moral
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 practical reason 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
not 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
to \uc0\u966  but an overriding practical reason to \u966  anyway. \
Within this admittedly quick taxonomy, virtue ethics has a not very clear place. Each virtue ethicist we shall consider has their own answers or their own emphases. \
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200

\b \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Moral Naturalism
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Neo-Aristotelians attempt to carve out a space in this landscape. Neo-Aristotelianism is taken as a brand of moral naturalism. What is moral naturalism? Moral naturalism is most broadly understood as any ethical theory that is compatible with the tradition of 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
naturalistic philosophy 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
(Lenman 2006)
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. \
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardeftab720\fi360\sl288\slmult1\sa200

\i0 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Although metaphysical naturalism (sometimes just \'93naturalism\'94) is a \'93reigning creed in analytic philosophy\'94 (Gasser 2013) it is not altogether clear whether it is one thing or many, and if it is one, what it is. Characterizing it here simply or without controversy is a hopeless task, but we must say something until we return to this question. So, very roughly, for naturalistic thinkers, all facts are natural facts. And natural facts are usually defined (both by exponents and opponents of such naturalism) in reference to the kinds of facts studied by scientists (Shafer-Landau 2003; Papinau 2007). These theses are admittedly far too vague to serve as anything more than banners.
\f1\fs24 \{\\Scrv_fn=
\f0\fs28 Even to call such naturalism \'93metaphysical naturalism\'94 might be wrong, since naturalism may be nothing more than a set of methodological commitments. But such naturalism has been called metaphysical naturalism as well as many other names: it has been called a \'93research program\'94 (Shafer-Landau 2003); a 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
weltenschauung 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
or worldview (Goetz 2008); a quasi-religion (Plantinga); a set of procedural methodological and substantive ontological commitments, a set of methodological commitments alone (Jacobs; Rea 2013). It has been maligned as scientism but also celebrated as scientism (Rosenburg 2011). Very loosely, naturalistic philosophers value the scientific method or methods above all others, including a priori philosophizing. Also, some or most naturalistic philosophers are anti-theists. Theism is the tradition that rivals naturalism (Murphy 2013). \

\f1\fs24 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\\end_Scrv_fn\}
\f0\fs28 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
	Not surprisingly, a wide variety of ethical theories \'97 some of them incompatible with each other \'97 are compatible with naturalism in this sense: Ethical nihilism, non-naturalist moral realism, error theory, and many others. To pick these out, let us call them 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
naturalistic ethics.  
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
I will return to the question of whether my ethical theory fits (or does not) as a naturalistic ethics in a later chapter on metaphilosophy. For now, let us zoom in a bit. \
	More narrowly, moral or ethical naturalism is a species of moral realism. (I shall not distinguish here between the terms \'91moral\'92 and \'91ethical\'92.) So for the moral naturalist, moral facts are part of the world in the sense that they exist, they are part of reality. And also, moral facts are part of the 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
natural world, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
in the sense that moral facts are natural facts. Now, moral facts are either identical to natural facts (strong type-type identification) or merely supervene upon natural facts in a way to be defined. Call the first reductive naturalism and the second non-reductive. 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Non-naturalism\

\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Moral naturalism is in this more narrow context contrasted with non-naturalism. Non-naturalism can come in a metaphysical flavor or an epistemological one. For instance, a non-naturalist like G. E. Moore (1903) might urge that rightness is a real property that is not physical, or identifiable with any natural property, or definable in natural terms. But a non-naturalist like Shafer-Landau does not so insist on distinguishing his view from non-reductive naturalists along metaphysical lines. \
He thinks the difference between his non-naturalism and someone else\'92s non-reductive naturalism doesn\'92t amount to much. Rather, he insists that at least some moral truths are knowable a priori. Let\'92s call Shafer-Landau\'92s contention that the distinction between non-reductive naturalism and non-naturalism \'97 on metaphysical grounds \'97 is of little or no importance the 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
minimal metaphysical significance 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
thesis (or MMS). If MMS is true, then the primary difference or significant difference between non-naturalism and naturalism (in ethics) is on the question of whether any moral judgments can be known to be true a priori. 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Kinds of Moral Naturalism\

\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Leaving the debate between naturalism and non-naturalism aside, let\'92s look more closely at a variety of ethical naturalisms. One kind of ethical naturalism today is consequentialism. The consequentialist usually takes some state of affairs to be universally desired or desirable for its own sake: human happiness (Mill), beauty (Moore), human welfare (Boyd), happiness of all sentient beings (Singer), and so on. Not all consequentialists are naturalists \'97 Moore for instance took beauty and goodness to be non-natural and irreducible properties whose instantiation was desirable for its own sake \'97 but most are. Let\'92s take Mill for example. Mill is standardly taken to have proposed a naturalistic theory (which was, of course, a modified Epicurean theory). For utilitarians, \'91right\'92 simply means 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
happiness-maximizing
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
. Happiness is pleasure and/or freedom from pain. When we act, and especially when we make laws, we often behave such that more people are hurt than helped. There is no other justification for a law or behavior than that it maximizes happiness for the greatest number of us (in a society or as a species), and there is no other critique or complaint of a law or behavior than that it tends to minimize happiness or maximize pain for a greater number. These kind of theories are very promisingly naturalistic. Happiness is defined in terms of human psychological states (pleasure/freedom from pain). The property of happiness and the human bearers of the property can explained as natural. Whatever metaphysical account we give of property-instantiation had better make the property of \'91feeling pleasure\'92 natural. Humans are, presumably, are continuous with nature. It would not do for a naturalists to argue that say, being ectoplasmic was a \'91natural property\'92 of poltergeists but deny that poltergeists are part of nature. Moral motivation is also natural, since all humans 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
already do 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
wish to be happy, already pursue happiness. \
	Of ethical naturalisms, there are four major types of views on offer. The last I\'92ll consider (neo-Aristotelianism) is the one I favor and will defend in this dissertation. But it is worthwhile to mention the others here, along with some quick arguments on their behalf and against them. For lack of a better organizing principle, I\'92ll take them from more to less reductionistic. 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Functionalism
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
One respectably naturalistic kind of ethical naturalism is \'93funcionalism\'94 of Frank Jackson. Jackson is a physicalist monist. As such, his theory closely identifies normative facts and natural (physical) facts. Normative facts are nothing over and above physical ones.  In fact, natural (physical) facts \'93entail\'94 moral facts the way natural (physical) facts \'93entail\'94 psychological ones. The constitution of your brain matter just so entails that you are a thinking thing, or feeling sensation F, or what have you. Similarly, the constitution of the physical and social world just so entails that R is right and W is wrong. Ethical properties supervene on descriptive properties: for any two possible worlds, if they have all the same physical properties then they have all the same ethical properties. \
I do not find this line of thought promising in part because I do not find physicalism persuasive. I cannot go into a full critique of Jackson here. Instead, two brief objections: Jackson\'92s reductive strategy amounts to showing that for every evaluative property there is (or could be) a descriptive property (given a large enough Ramsey-style series of disjunctions). But this would only work if demonstrating the universal correlation between X and Y demonstrated the identity of X and Y. That is a bullet Jackson is willing to bite. I, with David Enoch, am not: it seems to me false that necessarily co-extensive properties are identical. He mentions \'93common examples\'94  of \'93(purported) counterexamples \'85. like triangularity (having three angles) and trilaterality (having three sides), or the property of being the number 2 and the property of being an even prime\'94. These are properties that are not or do not most plausibly seem identical but are necessarily co-extensive.\
A second worry: Jackson\'92s defense against open question objections is inadequate. He identifies the relevant evaluative property to be reduced by drawing it from \'93folk morality\'94 and equating it with some descriptive property. The evaluative property is one we already roughly know, such as \'91rightness.\'92 The descriptive property he says \'93satisfies the role mature folk morality assigns to rightness\'94. The problem is the big (Ramsified) descriptive property 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
by his own lights 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
includes an evaluative component: it satisfies the role assigned by \'93
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
mature\'94 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
folk morality. Mature\'94 can of course have a purely factual or descriptive meaning (\'93mature bourbon\'94 is simply older than others) but it most often has a positive evaluative connotation (\'93a mature 12-year old\'94 is more responsible than her peers). I dare say by the ambiguous predicate \'91mature\'92 Jackson has unwittingly introduced into his hoped-for 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
purely descriptive property 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
just another kind of evaluative property. If he means the mature folk morality simply comes later in time then the open questioner could ask: 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
yes it\'92s older, but is it better? 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
If he means it is 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
better, 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
then all he has done is define one evaluative property in terms of another evaluative property. 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
Cornell Realism (Boyd, Railton)\

\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
A second kind of ethical naturalism is \'93Cornell Realism.\'94 Contemporary consequentialists follow some parts of Mill (though of course update his theory in many ways). For so called \'93Cornell Realists\'94 like Richard Boyd, what in part makes consequentialism so attractive is that it makes ethical inquiry continuous with scientific inquiry. The kinds of things that benefit human beings are natural things: food, shelter, clothing, peaceful society, companions for friendship and mates for romance, freedom of thought, etc.\
For Boyd, evaluative predicates like \'92good\'92 are similar to natural kinds like \'91metal\'92 which answer to specific families of natural properties. Furthermore, once we flesh out what kinds of things are good, what kinds of things contribute to our welfare, we can begin to identify what kinds of political policies bring those goods about. If I want to know what happiness is (the end of ethical decisions), I can learn more about it from cognitive and social sciences. If I want to know how to bring it above (the means to ethical ends), I can learn much from psychology, sociology, history, economics, and so on.\
I do not find consequentialism very promising. Certainly, ethical inquiry can glean much from the cognitive and social sciences in understanding the details of human health and flourishing and, in some cases, learn about the means to welfare. But as a final theory consequentialism is inadequate.\
Firstly, it tends to ground all normative facts in facts about humans, and I don\'92t think anyone has yet given a satisfyingly naturalistic reduction of 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
human
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
nature 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
itself. (This is a point I return to in the third essay.) Secondly, arguments that ground what we should do in what we actually do often illicitly move from \'91is\'92 to \'91ought\'92. That is, they begin with factual premises and end with evaluative conclusions. \'93People seek happiness, therefore they ought to seek happiness for the greatest number.\'94 This is only licit if we grant one ungrounded evaluative premise, like \'93we ought to do for others what we do for ourselves.\'94 That premise seems to cite a normative fact that is both real and not obviously natural. Thirdly, I agree with Elizabeth Anscombe\'92s criticism that consequentialism is far too open-minded about some actions we already know are wrong. She says it is no use arguing with someone who \'93really thinks, in advance, that it is open to question whether such an action as procuring the judicial execution of the innocent should be quite excluded from consideration.\'94\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\super \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\nosupersub  For a consequentialist, the very meaning of evaluative terms like \'91right\'92 is tied to an indeterminate notion: \'93
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
whatever is most beneficial 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
to the most people\'94. But we already know determinately, in advance, that it is unjust to judicially execute the innocent. Pretending the case is not closed is not just 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
implausible
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
; it is 
\i \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
immoral. 
\i0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
There are some moral judgments we would be wrong to be close-minded about \'97 others we would be wrong to keep an open mind about. 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
\
Quietism\

\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Another type of ethical naturalism is called (by some) quietism. Thomas Nagel, for instance, is one who claims a kind of rationalistic naturalism that he denies has to entail metaphysical \'93baggage.\'94 He says that moral facts are known directly by reason the same way other non-empirical facts are known. For example, we know that modus ponens is a valid mode of inference, the square of three is nine, and if John is a bachelor then necessarily he is unmarried. Similarly we know that if my car is going to hit my neighbor\'92s dog in the road, I should slam on the breaks. Such evaluative truths are, he avers, just as naturalistically respectable as mathematical, logical, or modal truths. Evaluative truths do not entail that there are a special sui generis category of facts (\'93moral facts\'94) over and above the natural facts of the dog in the road and the fact that I have time to slam on the breaks. \
\pard\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\pardeftab720\fi1080\sl288\slmult1\sa200
\cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
John McDowell is another who claims that his ethical theory is naturalistic \'97 though not reductive and \'93baldly\'94 naturalistic. That is, he grounds normative facts in human sensitivity to the \'93space of reasons\'94, but declines to posit a special, supernatural reality to that space of reasons or to humanity. Human rationality and practical rationality are \'93partially re-enchanted\'94 in that they are not reductively, mechanistically natural but neither are they fully enchanted, special, sui generis. Rather, we learn normative facts by \'93second nature\'94, by growing up in families where normative facts are spoken of and treated properly.  \
While I can agree with the emphatic insistence on moral realism, I do not find this kind of \'93anti-metaphysics\'94 promising. Briefly, it ignores the puzzle that ethical and other normative facts seem just fundamentally different from descriptive facts. Instead of naturalizing normative facts, it folds mysterious normative facts into a bundle (with mathematical and logical facts, say) and leaves the whole bundle mysterious.  It seems to me to help itself to the non-naturalist (platonist) belief that normative facts are real and truly different from natural facts without being willing to follow through with the logical consequences. }