{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ### Outline of chapter ###\
\
I shall attempt to provide adequate answers to these questions by dividing the chapter into the following sections. \
\
**Section 1 Project** \'97 What is MacIntyre\'92s project? In order to make sense of MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue, we must step back a bit. Section 1 therefore tells some of the backstory that makes MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue intelligible. It explores MacIntyre\'92s accounts of epistemological crisis, tradition, and moral inquiry. The primary error of modern morality was its rejection of, or rather misunderstanding of, teleology. Modern moralities (especially Kant and Mill) attempt to retain the semblance of teleology without the substance. But it has not, and will never, work. Although such moralists claim to deny teleology they invoke it in their theories and inconsistently use everyday common sense moral concepts that *are* functional and teleological. \
\
**Section 2 Virtue** \'97 What is MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue? This section summarizes MacIntyre\'92s preliminary definition of virtue as \'93acquired human qualities that enable their possessor to achieve those goods which are internal to practices\'94[@macintyre1984after 191] and explores the expanded definition that invokes tradition. Tradition-constituted rationality undergirds the philosophical search for an adequate and useful ethics. \
\
\
**Section 3 Objections** \'97 What are the objections to MacIntyre\'92s ethical project or his account of virtue? I voice a select few of the many objections that readers and scholars have posed.  Some \'93objections\'94 are really demands for clarification on MacIntyre\'92s claims, though others certainly dispute those claims. Section 3 therefore asks whether MacIntyre\'92s virtue ethics is relative to tradition, whether his concept of tradition is coherent, and whether his account of virtue assumes a discredited teleological metaphysics of Aristotle. \
\
Is there really a theory of practice that can underwrite \'93second nature\'94 \'97 a social teleology, or does teleology need to be a part of \'93primary nature\'94. \
\
**Section 4 Replies** \'97 How plausible is MacIntyre\'92s account of virtue?  In the final section, I shall carefully endorse part and reject part of MacIntyre's account. \
\
For instance, I reject part of his notion that virtues are relative to changing traditions rather than a stable human nature. And I endorse the thesis that human practice is teleological and hence that non-teleological ethics are either false or (in the end) *actually* covertly teleological, but defer the question of the relationship between *social* teleology and *physical*,  biological, natural, or metaphysical teleology. \
\
}