{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl360\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## Metaethics and Ethics  \
\
### Moore and after\
Metaethics in its modern form began with G. E. Moore\'92s 
\i *Principia Ethica*. 
\i0 Of course, the questions that concern modern metaethicists were posed and discussed by prior thinkers. However, the *Principia* gave a distinctive form to these questions and suggested a distinctive range of possible answers. We shall see how Philippa Foot and others dispute the validity of that form and that range. For now, it is better to summarize a bit of Moore\'92s thinking and the legacy his thinking created. \
\
Moore argued that all previous ethical philosophers had failed to resolve their disputes for a failure to define their terms. The question of what the word \'91good\'92 *means* (and, possibly the same question, what \'91good\'92 *refers to*) is distinct from the question *which things are good?* The first question is a conceptual question that aims to define a category. The second question is a substantive or existential question that aims to bring other concepts within that category. \
\
Moore argued (or according to some critics, *assumed*) that \'91goodness\'92 was indefinable. That is, the good could not be defined in terms of any other property. It is false that \'91goodness is pleasure\'92  or \'91goodness is whatever is most real\'92. That we pursue pleasure is a psychological claim, not an ethical one; that we judge something to be real is a metaphysical claim, not an ethical one. \
\
#### G.E. Moore, The Naturalistic Fallacy\
\
If the good is indefinable, then any attempt to define it is going to fail. Any attempt to reduce the concept to a concept of lesser intension, or to translate it it as a concept, commits the \'93naturalistic fallacy.\'94 Moore is clear that the naturalistic fallacy isn\'92t *just* the error of defining the good as a natural property (such as the pleasant) but also the error of defining the good as a metaphysical or supernatural property (such as the Really Really, or the Divinely-Ordained). \
\
#### Ethics\
\
Moore\'92s book comes down from its metaethical heavens back to the normative earth. He argues that whatever is good intrinsically can be known by direct moral perception. Whatever is good instrumentally can be known a posteriori through probabilistic reasoning about causal links between actions and their effects. Whatever necessarily brings about (or tends to bring about) intrinsically good states of affairs is instrumentally good. \
\
Intrinsic goods, for Moore, are three: aesthetic pleasure, friendship, and knowledge.\
\
#### The Legacy \
\
Moore set off a firestorm of debate on this issues. By the account of most of my five key authors, Moore\'92s legacy is largely a tangent from the deeper philosophical questions within ethics. }