{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf130
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 ## Why virtue ethics? ##\
\
My approach to philosophical ethics is to study virtue ethicists and to explore virtue and related concepts like practical reason and happiness. \
\
A reasonable question to respond to right away is this: Why write about virtue? Why study virtue ethicists? I have two answers: one sociological and general, the other psychological and personal. \
\
The sociological answer first: In the last 60 years or so, \'93virtue ethics\'94 broadly construed has garnered the support of a remarkably high percentage of analytic philosophers.[@chalmers2014philosophers. This survey shows that roughly the same amount of analytic philosophers adhere to "virtue ethics" as adhere to deontology (about 1/5th).] \
\
There are various interpretations of this revival. One is that many philosophers have become profoundly dissatisfied with modern moral philosophy. (Alasdair MacIntyre represents this view.) On this reading, Aristotle and Confucius provide refreshing alternatives to the stolid, dry, rationalism of Kant or Mill.\
\
But one of our most prestigious living virtue ethicists, Rosalind Hursthouse, disputes this interpretation. Virtue ethics presented itself as a rival during the early fledgling efforts to win a place at the table of modern moral philosophy; now that it *has* a place, such a presentation is needlessly combative. Her alternative interpretation is lent support by the acquisition (or re-acquisition) of virtue talk in other modern moral philosophies. Julia Driver, Ben Bradley and others have been working to articulate a theory they call \'93virtue consequentialism\'94 or \'93character consequentialism\'94. In contrast to \'93act\'94 or \'93rule\'94 utilitarianisms, virtue consequentialism describes virtues as those traits whose possessors tend to bring about the most desirable consequences. \
\
A second interpretation of the surprising renaissance of virtue ethics is that virtue concepts are potent and flexible. That is, virtue concepts can be systematized into coherent, stable, theories of their own. But they can also can enrich deontological and utilitarian and contractarian theories.  In fact, they can even help non-philosophers (such as college undergraduate) to avoid damaging vices and live well. The question "How do I live well? What is a beautiful life for me?" is, arguably, not an optional one but an inescapable question that arises for every person that survives to adulthood. \
\
My own view is that both of these interpretations of the revival of contemporary virtue ethics capture an important truth. On the one hand, those who study virtue ethics can indeed achieve an excellent position from which to critique modern moral philosophy. Long familiarity with cultures, places, and times different from one's own has the salubrious effect of opening one's eyes to one's own culture and time. The philosopher conversant with Aristotle or Aquinas likely to notice and articulate modern assumptions or biases that are invisible to those of us who live in modernity. \
\
At the same time, it is not a foregone conclusion that contemporary virtue ethicist will *reject* widespread modern assumptions. Some, such as Murdoch and MacIntyre, did become staunch opponents of modernity. Some, such as McDowell and Hursthouse, become staunch defenders, even while working to enrich modernity with pre-modern tradition. \
\
Throughout these investigations, I consider both possibilities. By taking a broader historical perspective, some virtue ethicists find in ancient and medieval philosophers a refreshing relief from the hidebound modern assumptions; others find in them an invigorating resource for advancing progress upon modern assumptions.\
\
The personal answer: Although I was raised in a household of strict morals, it was not until I was introduced (in undergraduate days) to the concept of virtue as a live and practical moral concept. What struck me then, as now, was the connection between virtue and *eudaimonia*, between goodness and happiness, between the individual's good and the public good, between the flourishing of one person and the thriving of the community. Human beings are not (like ants) parts of a collective, beholden to the hive for food and safety; nor are human beings (like Homer's Cyclops) *radically individual* loners, isolated from all neighbors. Rather, in the famous words of St. Paul, "we, being many, are one body... and every one members one of another" (Rom 12.5). The crucial metaphor that illuminates morality is not the legal but the organic. Virtue concepts are organic. They are often praised (and *criticized*) for being "uncodifiable\'94.[See @mcdowell1979virtue for a discussion of the \'93uncodifiability\'94 nature of deductive *and* practical reason, which discussion owes much to Wittgenstein.] Virtue concepts are practical, flexible, sometimes fuzzy -- just like every useful concept. Since being introduced to the older tradition of living virtuously in order to thrive and be happy, and since introducing others likewise, these concepts and the tradition they enrich has come to seem as natural as breathing and as necessary. \
\
## Some themes ##\
\
In consequence of the revival of virtue ethics, there are many lively and interesting controversies on the main stage as well as some fascinating sideshows. Though consensus around the answers is still forthcoming, a set of thematic questions emerge: \
\
1. First and foremost, what exactly *is* virtue (and its opposite, vice)? There are many accounts of virtue. Are they compatible or are there some  that are more plausible? \
2. Since Aristotle's writings, virtues have often been thought to play a special role in making the virtuous agent *happy* (eudaemonia, flourishing, thriving, well off, etc.).[Cf. @annas2011intelligent] But Bentham and Nietzsche mock this alleged role. Is there any inherent relation between virtue and happiness? If so, are virtues necessary for happiness (as Foot thinks) or necessary *and sufficient* for happiness (as McDowell thinks)? \
3. Several conceptions of virtue (following Aristotle) have set eudaimonia as the \'93function\'94 of humanity, its purpose or telos. Does it make sense to speak of a *human function*? If so, just what is it? And how does it relate to our unique attributes, like higher rationality, self-awareness, and language?  @brown2008 accepts natural final causality but rejects eudaimonia, preferring to speak in Darwinian terms about our purpose as reproduction, while @hursthouse1999 speaks about four "characteristically human ends" including but not limited to reproduction. \
4. Relatedly, if virtue is sufficient for happiness, does that mean that the life lived in pursuit of virtues and avoidance of vices is a life of shameless egoism?[Cf. @annas2009; @huang2010self] \
5. Another traditional notion defines virtues as those traits by which one becomes *fully human* or actualizes human nature. (Human nature is something like a set of properties or capacities common to all humans -- at least all non-defective humans. Human nature has been thought to include such essential properties as practical rationality, or rationality in general, language, social consciousness, self-consciousness, or genetic and other environmental/cultural properties.) Talk of a fixed "human nature" implies that an agent's humanity is in one sense a *given* to be discovered, while in another sense it is a goal to be achieved. One of the most persistent and widespread objections to this conception of virtue is that it seems to depend on discredited Aristotelian metaphysical picture of human nature.\
6. Even if we could expound and defend a realistic concept of human nature, would basing ethical conclusions on metaphysical or psychological premises commit Moore\'92s so-called "naturalistic fallacy"? How do we proceed from a premise about *the way human nature is* to the specific normative conclusion such as *humans ought to keep their promises*?\
2. Furthermore, there are skeptical worries to the effect that there are no habitual characteristics or acquired traits such as virtues and vices are supposed to be.[@harman2009skepticism] Do virtues and vices qua stable character traits even exist? Or if they exist, do they matter enough to make theorizing about virtue even interesting?[@kamtekar2004situationism]\
3. There is a growing body of literature on the theme of intellectual (rather than merely moral) virtues.[Cf. @zagzebski1996virtues;  @bloomfield2000virtue] Some think practical wisdom (or phronesis) is one virtue among many, while others think it the master virtue that unifies both practical and intellectual. Are all virtues practical or are some theoretical? \
9. Finally, there are more abstract or foundational questions such as how (if at all) might an ethical theory built on virtue concepts defend the claim of objective moral knowledge? And what does \'91objective\'92 mean? I have been helped in the clarification of this term by an old but extremely perspicuous article by @sellars1927naturalism, the father of Wilfred Sellars.\
\
The five key virtue ethicists listed above address some or all of these questions. Since our focus must be limited somehow, I try to remain attentive to the primary themes of my project while commenting briefly or at least acknowledging some of the key general questions that interest virtue ethicists. \
}