### Polyanna Objection

A third and final objection Lott calls the "Polyanna Problem" in that virtue ethicists are liable to be naively optimistic about what such a search through nature might discover.[@lott2012moral]  To see this problem, supposing that the other two objections have been overcome: human norms are discoverable and demonstrable both practical and relevant. Still are such norms merely "protonormative"[@ward2013against, chapter 2.] or fully *ethical*? Are we obligated to fulfill all such norms? Just some? How are they to be distinguished from unethical, vile behaviors also statistically common among human behaviors? Empirically, some acorns become fully grown, mature oaks, but other acorns become stulted, sickly specimens. Most acorns never become anything other than acorns before they disintegrate into dust in the soil.  So statistical majorities will not do the trick. Likewise, norms can be discovered for both good and evil: Some animals protect their young while other animals abandon or even consume their young. Some humans are kind and gentle while others are vicious and cruel.  Anscombe anticipates this worry when she says: 

>The search for "norms" might lead someone to look for laws of nature, as if the universe were a legislator; but in the present day this is not likely to lead to good results: it might lead one to eat the weaker according to the laws of nature, but would hardly lead anyone nowadays to notions of justice.[@anscombe1958 14] 

Can we move from vague statements such as "human beings are language users" to particular moral statements: 'Human beings make and keep promises'?