{\rtf \li720 \fi-720 \sl240 \slmult1 \sa0 Alfano, Mark. {\i{}Current Controversies in Virtue Theory}. Edited by Mark Alfano. Routledge, 2015.\
Andreou, Chrisoula. \uc0\u8220{}Getting on in a Varied World.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Social Theory and Practice} 32, no. 1 (2006): 61\uc0\u8211{}73.\
Annas, Julia. \uc0\u8220{}Being Virtuous and Doing the Right Thing.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association}, 61\uc0\u8211{}75, 2004.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}Intelligent Virtue}. Oxford University Press, 2011.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}The Morality of Happiness}. Oxford University Press, 1993.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Virtue Ethics and the Charge of Egoism.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Morality and Self Interest}, edited by Paul Bloomfield, 205\uc0\u8211{}21. Oxford University Press, 2009.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Virtue Ethics: What Kind of Naturalism?\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Virtue Ethics, Old and New}, edited by Stephen Gardiner, 11\uc0\u8211{}29. Cornell University Press, 2005.\
Anscombe, Elizabeth. \uc0\u8220{}Modern Moral Philosophy.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Philosophy} 33, no. 124 (1958): 1\uc0\u8211{}19.\
Aquinas, Thomas. {\i{}Summa Theologica}, n.d.\
Arnhart, Larry. \uc0\u8220{}Aristotle\uc0\u8217{}s Biopolitics: A Defense of Biological Teleology against Biological Nihilism.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Politics and the Life Sciences} 6, no. 2 (1988): pp. 173\uc0\u8211{}229.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}The New Darwinian Naturalism in Political Theory.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}American Political Science Review} 89, no. 02 (1995): 389\uc0\u8211{}400.\
Bailey, Andrew M. \uc0\u8220{}Animalism.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Philosophy Compass} 10, no. 12 (2015): 867\uc0\u8211{}83.\
Beadle, Ron. \uc0\u8220{}MacIntyre\uc0\u8217{}s Influence on Business Ethics.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Handbook of Virtue Ethics in Business and Management}, 1\uc0\u8211{}9. Springer, Dordrecht, 2015.\
Beauchamp, Tom, and James Childress. {\i{}Principles of Biomedical Ethics}. Oxford University Press, 2001.\
Blackburn, Simon. {\i{}Spreading the Word}. Oxford University Press, 1985.\
Blackman, Reid D. \uc0\u8220{}Meta-Ethical Realism with Good of a Kind.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}European Journal of Philosophy} 23, no. 2 (2015): 273\uc0\u8211{}92.\
Blair, James, Derek Mitchell, and Karina Blair. {\i{}The Psychopath: Emotion and the Brain.} Blackwell Publishing, 2005.\
Bloomfield, Paul. \uc0\u8220{}Eudaimonia and Practical Rationality.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Virtue and Happiness}, edited by Rachana Kamtekar. Oxford University Press, 2012.\
Bostrom, Nick. \uc0\u8220{}In Defense of Posthuman Dignity.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Bioethics} 19, no. 3 (2005): 202\uc0\u8211{}14.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Transhumanist Values.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Journal of Philosophical Research} 30 (2005): 3\uc0\u8211{}14.\
Boyd, Richard. \uc0\u8220{}Finite Beings, Finite Goods: The Semantics, Metaphysics and Ethics of Naturalist Consequentialism.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Philosophy and Phenomenological Research} 66, no. 3 (2003): 505\uc0\u8211{}53.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}How to Be a Moral Realist.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Contemporary Materialism}, 1988, 307.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Realism, Anti-Foundationalism and the Enthusiasm for Natural Kinds.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Philosophical Studies} 61, no. 1 (1991): 127\uc0\u8211{}48.\
Brown, R. Stephen. {\i{}Moral Virtue and Nature: A Defense of Ethical Naturalism}. Continuum, 2008.\
Brown, Stephen. \uc0\u8220{}Really Naturalizing Virtue.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Ethica} 4 (2005): 7\uc0\u8211{}22.\
Carlson, Greg N. \uc0\u8220{}A Unified Analysis of the English Bare Plural.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Linguistics and Philosophy} 1, no. 3 (1977): 413\uc0\u8211{}57.\
Carr, David, and Jan Steutel. {\i{}Virtue Ethics and Moral Education}. Routledge, 2005.\
Chakravartty, Anjan. \uc0\u8220{}Scientific Realism.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy}, edited by Edward N. Zalta, 2015.\
Cimpian, Andrei, Amanda C Brandone, and Susan A Gelman. \uc0\u8220{}Generic Statements Require Little Evidence for Acceptance but Have Powerful Implications.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Cognitive Science} 34, no. 8 (2010): 1452\uc0\u8211{}82.\
Cohen, Ariel. \uc0\u8220{}On the Generic Use of Indefinite Singulars.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Journal of Semantics} 18, no. 3 (2001): 183\uc0\u8211{}209.\
Cohn, Jeffrey P. \uc0\u8220{}Saving the California Condor.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}BioScience} 49, no. 11 (1999): 864\uc0\u8211{}68.\
Cooper, John. {\i{}Complete Works of Plato}. Hackett, 1997.\
Cummins, Robert. \uc0\u8220{}Functional Analysis.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}The Journal of Philosophy} 72, no. 20 (1975): 741\uc0\u8211{}65.\
Cuneo, Terence. {\i{}Speech and Morality}. Oxford University Press, 2014.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}The Normative Web}. Oxford University Press, 2007.\
D\uc0\u8217{}Andrea, Thomas D. {\i{}Tradition, Rationality, and Virtue: The Thought of Alasdair MacIntyre}. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2006.\
Deacon, Terrence W. {\i{}The Symbolic Species: The Co-Evolution of Language and the Brain}. WW Norton & Company, 1998.\
Douven, Igor. \uc0\u8220{}Abduction.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy}, edited by Edward N. Zalta, 2011.\
Dupr\uc0\u233{}, John. {\i{}Processes of Life: Essays in the Philosophy of Biology}. Oxford University Press, 2012.\
Edgley, Roy. \uc0\u8220{}Practical Reason.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Mind} 74, no. 294 (1965): 174\uc0\u8211{}91.\
FitzPatrick, William. \uc0\u8220{}Morality and Evolutionary Biology.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy}, edited by Edward N. Zalta, Spring 2016., 2016.\
Flew, Antony. {\i{}Thinking about Thinking: Or, Do I Sincerely Want to Be Right?} Fontana/Collins, 1975.\
Fodor, Jerry A. {\i{}The Mind Doesn\uc0\u8217{}t Work That Way: The Scope and Limits of Computational Psychology}. MIT press, 2001.\
Foot, Philippa. \uc0\u8220{}Does Moral Subjectivism Rest on a Mistake?\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement} 46 (2000): 107\uc0\u8211{}23.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}Natural Goodness}. Oxford University Press, 2001.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}Virtues and Vices: And Other Essays in Moral Philosophy}. Oxford University Press, 2002.\
Frankena, William K. \uc0\u8220{}The Naturalistic Fallacy.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Mind}, 1939, 464\uc0\u8211{}77.\
Frey, Jennifer Ann. \uc0\u8220{}The Will and the Good.\uc0\u8221{} University of Pittsburgh, 2012.\
Gelman, Susan, and Lawrence Hirschfeld. \uc0\u8220{}How Biological Is Essentialism.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Folkbiology} 9 (1999): 403\uc0\u8211{}46.\
Gibbard, Allan. \uc0\u8220{}Normative Properties.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}The Southern Journal of Philosophy} 41, no. S1 (2003): 141\uc0\u8211{}57.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}Thinking How to Live}. Harvard University Press, 2009.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}Wise Choices, Apt Feelings: A Theory of Normative Judgment}. Harvard University Press, 1992.\
Godfrey-Smith, Peter. \uc0\u8220{}Conditions for Evolution by Natural Selection.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}The Journal of Philosophy} 104, no. 10 (2007): 489\uc0\u8211{}516.\
Goodall, Jane. \uc0\u8220{}Infant Killing and Cannibalism in Free-Living Chimpanzees.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Folia Primatologica} 28, no. 4 (1977): 259\uc0\u8211{}82.\
Haldane, John. \uc0\u8220{}A Return to Form in the Philosophy of Mind.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Ratio} 11, no. 3 (1998): 253\uc0\u8211{}77.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}On Coming Home to (Metaphysical) Realism.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Philosophy} 71, no. 276 (1996): 287\uc0\u8211{}96.\
Harmon, Justin L. \uc0\u8220{}The Normative Architecture of Reality: Towards an Object-Oriented Ethics.\uc0\u8221{} University of Kentucky, 2013.\
Heath, Dwight B. \uc0\u8220{}Sociocultural Variants in Alcoholism.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Encyclopedic Handbook of Alcoholism}, 1982, 426\uc0\u8211{}40.\
Hooker, Brad, and Bart Streumer. \uc0\u8220{}Procedural and Substantive Practical Rationality.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}The Oxford Handbook of Rationality}, 57\uc0\u8211{}74. Oxford University Press, 2004.\
Horn, Laurence R. \uc0\u8220{}Contradiction.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy}, edited by Edward N. Zalta, Spring 2014., 2014.\
Horton, John, and Susan Mendus. {\i{}After MacIntyre: Critical Perspectives on the Work of Alasdair MacIntyre}. University of Notre Dame, 1994.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Alasdair MacIntyre: After Virtue and After.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Current Controversies in Virtue Theory}, edited by Mark Alfano. Routledge, 2015.\
Huang, Yong. \uc0\u8220{}The Self-Centeredness Objection to Virtue Ethics.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly} 84, no. 4 (2010): 651\uc0\u8211{}92.\
Huneman, Philippe. \uc0\u8220{}Naturalising Purpose: From Comparative Anatomy to the `adventure of Reason\uc0\u8217{}.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences} 37, no. 4 (2006): 649\uc0\u8211{}74.\
Hurka, Thomas. {\i{}Virtue, Vice, and Value}. Oxford University Press, 2000.\
Hursthouse, Rosalind. \uc0\u8220{}Neo-Aristotelian Ethical Naturalism.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}The International Encyclopedia of Ethics}, 2013.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Normative Virtue Ethics.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}How Should One Live?: Essays on the Virtues}, edited by Roger Crisp, 19\uc0\u8211{}33. Oxford University Press, 1996.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}On Virtue Ethics}. Oxford University Press, 1998.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Practical Wisdom: A Mundane Account.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society}, 106:283\uc0\u8211{}307. Wiley-Blackwell, 2006.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Virtue Ethics.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy}, edited by Edward N. Zalta, 2013.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Virtue Ethics and Human Nature.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Hume Studies} 25, no. 1 (1999): 67\uc0\u8211{}82.\
Jin, Xiangshu, Robert Townley, and Lawrence Shapiro. \uc0\u8220{}Structural Insight into AMPK Regulation: ADP Comes into Play.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Structure} 15, no. 10 (2007): 1285\uc0\u8211{}95.\
Johnson, Monte. {\i{}Aristotle on Teleology}. Oxford University Press, 2005.\
Krifka, Manfred. \uc0\u8220{}Bare NPs: Kind-Referring, Indefinites, Both, or Neither?\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Semantics and Linguistic Theory}, 13:180\uc0\u8211{}203, 2003.\
Kripke, Saul A. {\i{}Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language: An Elementary Exposition}. Harvard University Press, 1982.\
Lawson, Christine Ann. {\i{}Understanding the Borderline Mother}. Jason Aronson, Incorporated, 2000.\
Lenman, James. \uc0\u8220{}Moral Naturalism.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy}, edited by Edward N. Zalta, 2014.\
Lennox, James. \uc0\u8220{}Darwin Was a Teleologist.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Biology and Philosophy} 8, no. 4 (1993): 409\uc0\u8211{}21.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Teleology.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Keywords in Evolutionary Biology}, 1992, 324\uc0\u8211{}33.\
Leslie, John. \uc0\u8220{}The Theory That the World Exists Because It Should.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}American Philosophical Quarterly} 7, no. 4 (1970): 286\uc0\u8211{}98.\
Leslie, Sarah-Jane. \uc0\u8220{}Generics: Cognition and Acquisition.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Philosophical Review} 117, no. 1 (2008): 1\uc0\u8211{}47.\
Leunissen, Mariska. {\i{}Explanation and Teleology in Aristotle\uc0\u8217{}s Science of Nature}. Cambridge University Press, 2010.\
Levy, Sanford. \uc0\u8220{}Philippa Foot\uc0\u8217{}s Theory of Natural Goodness.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Forum Philosophicum}, 14:1\uc0\u8211{}15, 2009.\
Linquist, Stefan, Edouard Machery, Paul E Griffiths, and Karola Stotz. \uc0\u8220{}Exploring the Folkbiological Conception of Human Nature.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences} 366, no. 1563 (2011): 444\uc0\u8211{}53.\
Lott, Micah. \uc0\u8220{}Moral Virtue as Knowledge of Human Form.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Social Theory and Practice} 38, no. 3 (2012): 407\uc0\u8211{}31.\
Lutz, Christopher. {\i{}Alasdair MacIntyre}. \\textbar Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2015.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}Reading Alasdair MacIntyre\uc0\u8217{}s After Virtue}. A&C Black, 2012.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}Tradition in the Ethics of Alasdair MacIntyre}. Lexington Books, 2004.\
MacFarquhar, Larissa. {\i{}Strangers Drowning: Grappling with Impossible Idealism, Drastic Choices, and the Overpowering Urge to Help}. Penguin Press HC, 2015.\
MacIntyre, Alasdair. {\i{}After Virtue}. University of Notre Dame, 1984.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}Dependent Rational Animals: Why Human Beings Need the Virtues}. Cambridge University Press, 1999.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Does Applied Ethics Rest on a Mistake?\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}The Monist} 67, no. 4 (1984): 498\uc0\u8211{}513.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Hume on Is and Ought.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}The Philosophical Review}, 1959, 451\uc0\u8211{}68.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}Macintyre Reader}. Edited by Kelvin Knight. University of Notre Dame, 1998.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Relativism, Power and Philosophy.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association}, 5\uc0\u8211{}22. JSTOR, 1985.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}The Idea of an Educated Public.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Education and Values: The Richard Peters Lectures} 15 (1987).\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}The Relationship of Philosophy to Its Past.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Philosophy in History}, 1984, 31\uc0\u8211{}48.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry}. University of Notre Dame, 1990.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Virtues in Foot and Geach,\uc0\u8221{} no. 52 (2002): 621\uc0\u8211{}31.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}Whose Justice? Which Rationality?} University of Notre Dame, 1988.\
Mautner, Michael. \uc0\u8220{}Life-Centered Ethics, and the Human Future in Space.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Bioethics} 23, no. 8 (2009): 433\uc0\u8211{}40.\
Mayr, Ernst. \uc0\u8220{}The Idea of Teleology.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Journal of the History of Ideas} 53, no. 1 (1992): pp. 117\uc0\u8211{}35.\
McDowell, John. {\i{}Mind and World}. Harvard University Press, 1996.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}Mind, Value, and Reality}. Harvard University Press, 1998.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Naturalism in the Philosophy of Mind.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Naturalism in Question}, edited by Mario De Caro and David Macarthur, 91\uc0\u8211{}105. Harvard University Press, 2004.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}The Role of Eudaimonia in Aristotle\uc0\u8217{}s Ethics\uc0\u8217{}.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Essays on Aristotle\uc0\u8217{}s Ethics}, edited by Am\uc0\u233{}lie Oksenberg Rorty, 359\uc0\u8211{}76. University of California Press, 1980.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Two Sorts of Naturalism.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Mind, Value, and Reality}, 167\uc0\u8211{}97. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1998.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Values and Secondary Qualities.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Mind, Value, and Reality}, 131\uc0\u8211{}50. Harvard University Press, 1998.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Values and Secondary Qualities.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Foundations of Ethics: An Anthology}, edited by Russ Shaffer-Landeau and Terence Cuneo, 137\uc0\u8211{}45. Blackwell, 2007.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Virtue and Reason.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}The Monist} 62, no. 3 (1979): 331\uc0\u8211{}50.\
McDowell, John, and I. G. McFetridge. \uc0\u8220{}Are Moral Requirements Hypothetical Imperatives?\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volumes} 52 (1978): 13\uc0\u8211{}42.\
Melville, Herman. {\i{}Bartleby, the Scrivener}. Best Classic Books, 1966.\
Millgram, Elijah. \uc0\u8220{}Reasonably Virtuous.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Ethics Done Right: Practical Reasoning as a Foundation for Moral Theory (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)}, 2005, 133\uc0\u8211{}67.\
Millikan, Ruth Garrett. {\i{}Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories: New Foundations for Realism}. MIT press, 1984.\
Morell, Virginia. \uc0\u8220{}Why Do Animals Sometimes Kill Their Babies?\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}National Geographic}, 2014. http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2014/03/140328-sloth-bear-zoo-infanticide-chimps-bonobos-animals/.\
Murphy, Mark. \uc0\u8220{}The Natural Law Tradition in Ethics.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy}, edited by Edward N. Zalta, 2011.\
Murphy, Mark C. {\i{}Alasdair MacIntyre}. Cambridge University Press, 2003.\
Nagel, Thomas. {\i{}Mind and Cosmos}. Oxford University Press, 2012.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}The Possibility of Altruism}. Princeton University Press, 1978.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}The View from Nowhere}. Oxford University Press, 1989.\
Nussbaum, Martha. \uc0\u8220{}Aristotle on Human Nature and the Foundations of Ethics.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}World, Mind, and Ethics: Essays on the Ethical Philosophy of Bernard Williams}, edited by J.E.J. Altham and Ross Harrison, 86\uc0\u8211{}131. Cambridge University Press, 1995.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Non-Relative Virtues: An Aristotelian Approach.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Midwest Studies In Philosophy} 13, no. 1 (1988): 32\uc0\u8211{}53.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}Virtue Ethics: A Misleading Category?\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}The Journal of Ethics} 3, no. 3 (1999): 163\uc0\u8211{}201.\
Oakes, Edward. \uc0\u8220{}The Achievement of Alasdair Macintyre.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}First Things}, 1996.\
Pelletier, Francis Jeffry, and Greg N Carlson. {\i{}The Generic Book}. University of Chicago Press, 1995.\
Perlman, Mark. \uc0\u8220{}The Modern Philosophical Resurrection of Teleology.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}The Monist} 87, no. 1 (2004): 3\uc0\u8211{}51.\
Pincoffs, Edmund. \uc0\u8220{}Quandary Ethics.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Mind}, 1971, 552\uc0\u8211{}71.\
Pinker, Steven. {\i{}The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature}. Penguin, 2003.\
Plantinga, Alvin. {\i{}Where the Conflict Really Lies: Science, Religion, and Naturalism}. Oxford University Press, 2011.\
Prasada, Sandeep, Sangeet Khemlani, Sarah-Jane Leslie, and Sam Glucksberg. \uc0\u8220{}Conceptual Distinctions amongst Generics.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Cognition} 126, no. 3 (2013): 405\uc0\u8211{}22.\
Quinn, Warren. \uc0\u8220{}Rationality and the Human Good.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Social Philosophy and Policy} 9, no. 02 (1992): 81\uc0\u8211{}95.\
Quinn, Warren, and Philippa Foot. {\i{}Morality and Action}. Cambridge University Press, 1993.\
Railton, Peter. \uc0\u8220{}Moral Realism.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Philosophical Review} 95, no. 2 (1986).\
Rehg, William, and Darin Davis. \uc0\u8220{}Conceptual Gerrymandering? The Alignment of Hursthouse\uc0\u8217{}s Naturalistic Virtue Ethics with Neo-Kantian Non-Naturalism.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}The Southern Journal of Philosophy} 41, no. 4 (2003): 583\uc0\u8211{}600.\
Russell, Bertrand. {\i{}The Basic Writings of Bertrand Russell, 1903-1959}. Psychology Press, 1992.\
Sadler, Brook J. \uc0\u8220{}Review of \uc0\u8216{}Natural Goodness.\uc0\u8217{}\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Essays in Philosophy} 5, no. 2 (2004): 28.\
Shafer-Landau, Russ. {\i{}Moral Realism: A Defence}. 4. Oxford University Press, 2003.\
Shapiro, James A. \uc0\u8220{}Revisiting the Central Dogma in the 21st Century.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences} 1178, no. 1 (2009): 6\uc0\u8211{}28.\
Slote, Michael. \uc0\u8220{}Agent-Based Virtue Ethics.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Midwest Studies in Philosophy} 20, no. 1 (1995): 83\uc0\u8211{}101.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}From Morality to Virtue}. Oxford University Press, 1992.\
Taylor, Charles. \uc0\u8220{}Justice After Virtue.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}After MacIntyre}, 16\uc0\u8211{}43. University of Notre Dame, 1994.\
Thompson, Allen. \uc0\u8220{}Reconciling Themes in Neo-Aristotelian Meta-Ethics.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}The Journal of Value Inquiry} 41, no. 2 (2007): 245\uc0\u8211{}63.\
Thompson, Michael. \uc0\u8220{}Apprehending Human Form.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement} 54 (2004): 47\uc0\u8211{}74.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. {\i{}Life and Action}. Harvard University Press, 2008.\
\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}\uc0\u8212{}. \uc0\u8220{}The Representation of Life.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Virtues and Reasons}, edited by Gavin Rosalind, Lawrence Hursthouse and Warren Quinn, 247\uc0\u8211{}96. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995.\
Toner, Christopher Hugh. \uc0\u8220{}Flourishing and Self-Interest in Virtue Ethics.\uc0\u8221{} University of Notre Dame, 2003.\
Waddington, Conrad Hal, and others. {\i{}The Strategy of the Genes. A Discussion of Some Aspects of Theoretical Biology.} London: George Allen & Unwin, Ltd., 1957.\
Waismann, Friedrich. {\i{}How I See Philosophy}. Springer, 1968.\
Wallace, R. Jay. \uc0\u8220{}Practical Reason.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy}, edited by Edward N. Zalta, 2014.\
Ward, Arthur. \uc0\u8220{}Against Natural Teleology and Its Application in Ethical Theory.\uc0\u8221{} Bowling Green State University, 2013.\
Ward, Keith. \uc0\u8220{}Kant\uc0\u8217{}s Teleological Ethics.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}The Philosophical Quarterly} 21, no. 85 (1971): 337\uc0\u8211{}51.\
Weinstein, Jack Russell. {\i{}On MacIntyre}. Wadsworth, 2003.\
Wielenberg, Erik. \uc0\u8220{}The Nature of Moral Virtue.\uc0\u8221{} Dissertation, PhD dissertation, 2000. http://scholarworks.umass.edu/dissertations/AAI9978570.\
Wiggins, David. \uc0\u8220{}Deliberation and Practical Reason.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society} 76 (1975): 29\uc0\u8211{}51.\
Williams, Bernard. \uc0\u8220{}Internal and External Reasons.\uc0\u8221{} In {\i{}Ethical Theory: An Anthology}, edited by Russ Shafer-Landau, 292\uc0\u8211{}98, 2007.\
Wilson, Edward. {\i{}Sociobiology: The New Synthesis}. Cambridge: Harvard, 1978.\
Woodcock, Scott. \uc0\u8220{}Philippa Foot\uc0\u8217{}s Virtue Ethics Has an Achilles\uc0\u8217{} Heel.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Dialogue} 45, no. 03 (2006): 445\uc0\u8211{}68.\
Zammito, John. \uc0\u8220{}Teleology Then and Now: The Question of Kant\uc0\u8217{}s Relevance for Contemporary Controversies over Function in Biology.\uc0\u8221{} {\i{}Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part} 37, no. 4 (2006): 748\uc0\u8211{}70.\
}