
#Chapter 1: The Project of Neo-Aristotelian Ethical Naturalism

## Introduction

The neo-Aristotelians base their ethical theory on human nature. This project may seem, on the face of it, hopeless. For one, the notion of "human nature" seems to some a bit vague and mystical, like the notion of an essence or Platonic universal underlying and uniting all human beings. Perhaps "human nature" is simply an abstraction by which we gesture at the "mess" of humanity, in all its irrational, inconsistent, variable glory. Secondly, (some others say) if there is such thing as human nature, it is simply our biological make up. Our biological make up is, in turn, to be characterized by examining our evolutionary history, genetics, physiology and neurophysiology, our geographical settings, etc., and by drawing connections between these biological facts and our cultural histories, social and anthropological customs, and so on. None of this has anything obviously to do with ethics. Thirdly, we quickly run afoul of Moore's so-called naturalistic fallacy.  Even if one the moral facts about good and bad or about virtues and vices could be shown to relate to descriptions something like "human nature", we would face the insurmountable barrier of deriving normative conclusions from descriptive propositions. The relation between human nature and ethics would, in the end, support a general non-cogntivist expressivism about moral talk: we approve of things that are survival-inducing, say, or disapprove of things that dissolve social bonds.^[A fourth objection from a quite different quarter is the worry that human nature is corrupted by sin and ancestral guilt. On this objection, even though human nature exists and even though a good person would be an exemplary human being as such, none of us actual human beings are situated appropriately to identify what is good or to become good. Our moral efforts, our natural inclinations, and even the very intellect by which we engage in moral reflection are co-opted by a deep brokenness of the heart -- a depravity of spirit. All our natural inclinations and best efforts to arise above them are doomed from the start, which renders our moral efforts in need of outside assistance if they are to make any progress. This objection is a real one, but I must defer it, for two reasons: (1) Those readers of different theological positions or no theological position at all will not have this worry; (2) I hope to treat the relation of virtue ethics to religion in general in a later work which make this objection its main theme.]

These objections are formidable, but responses can be made. They either rest on misunderstandings of the neo-Aristotelian project or rest on legitimate limitations of philosophical ethics *tout court*. In the former case, all we need is to clarify the project. In the latter case, we need to accept the limitation and work within it, showing how much (or how little) philosophical ethics may hope for.  

In providing preliminary responses to the promise or to the very possibility of an ethics grounded in human nature, I shall explain more of the neo-Aristotelian project. Several pieces of the argument that here receive an initial treatment will receive a more thorough (and hopefully adequate) treatment in later chapters. 

## Grounding ethics

Very roughly speaking, a non-philosopher might derive what ethical thoughts he has in his religion or social tradition. A reflective philospoher might try to ground ethics in the form of the Good, in one's sentiments and natural sympathies, in human reason, in human contracts, in pleasure and pain, and so on. What hope is there for defending human nature as a superior starting point? 

**Methodological question:** How much evaluative truth can one learn (about virtues and vices, practical wisdom, etc.) by examining human nature, including our rationality and possibly our natural teleology? 

If we can infer some evaluative truths from some natural facts, then a case needs to be made for that general point. The facts of *the way we are* supply excellent (indeed, very often overriding) reason for *the way we ought to be*. And I shall argue that some evaluative judgments -- such as that 'virtues are beneficial for humans' and that 'wisdom is a virtue' -- true and can be known to be true by examining human nature, which is practical, rational animals. 

## Human nature is a mess? 
The first worry is that human nature is really a mess. Bernard Williams expresses the worry that human nature is an "ill-sorted bricolage of powers and instincts": 

>The second and more general reason lies not in the particular ways in which human beings may have evolved, but simply in the fact that they have evolved, and by natural selection. The idea of a naturalistic ethics was born of a deeply teleological outlook, and its best expression, in many ways, is still to be found in Aristotle's philosophy, a philosophy according to which there is inherent in each natural kind of thing an appropriate way for things of that kind to behave. On that view it must be the deepest desire—need?—purpose?—satisfaction?—of human beings to live in the way that is in this objective sense appropriate to them (the fact that modern words break up into these alternatives expresses the modern break‐up of Aristotle's view). Other naturalistic views, Marxist and some which indeed call themselves ‘evolutionary’, have often proclaimed themselves free from any such picture, but it is basically very hard for them to avoid some appeal to an implicit teleology, an order in relation to which there could be an existence which would satisfy all the most basic human needs at once. The first and hardest lesson of Darwinism, that there is no such teleology at all, and that there is no orchestral score provided from anywhere according to which human beings have a special part to play, still has to find its way into ethical thought.[@@williams2011ethics 44]

The response of Hursthouse, Foot, Brown, and Nagel, is that natural teleology is indeed compatible with Darwinism and does indeed provide a "an appropriate way to behave" (or we might add, *ways*) that is "inherent in each natural kind of thing." Natural teleology is only incompatible with a teleological nihilism distinctive of (certain brands) of metaphysical reductionism.  Strictly speaking, Darwinian evolutionary theory may be summarized in six theses that describe (in painstaking detail) terrestrial biological processes of genetic mutation, reproduction, preservation, and proliferation. Strictly speaking, about teleology, it says absolutely nothing.[Cf. @plantinga2011conflict %% chapter] 

As for those brands of metaphysical reductionism that are incompatible with natural teleology, if our knowledge of natural teleology is well-grounded enough then so much the worse for metaphysical reductionism. 

While Hursthouse is quick to assure the reader that her goal is not the production of a "scientific" ethics, by this she means only that ethical evaluations cannot be made from "outside" the ethical outlook itself: ethics is not to become a branch of biology. She emphatically *does* mean to make evaluations of human beings can be made in a way analogous to the way we evaluate cacti or deer. 

In each case we rely on the notion of natural kinds and their appropriate way of behaving:

>in relation to which they are evaluated as good or defective. The evaluations do not—as they might in a post‐Darwinian age—evaluate members of species of living things simply as good, or not so good, or downright defective, as replicators of their genes.[@hursthouse1998 257-8]

Hursthouse's primary response to Williams is that his worry is not actually rooted in the progress of modern science. He himself admits that "many of course have come to that conclusion before" (the conclusion that "human beings are to some degree a mess... for whom no form of life is likely to prove entirely satisfactory, either individually or socially.")[@hursthouse1998 261, quoting @williams1995making 44 %%] Rather, Hursthouse points out, his worry is an expression of moral nihilism and despair. He believes human nature is a mess *because* he believes no form of life is completely satisfactory for everyone. That blade cuts the other way. If one has hope that some form of life is or may be at least mostly satisfactory for at least some people, it makes sense to believe human nature is not completely a mess. And Hursthouse movingly praises hope as a virtue.

>Alternatively (or perhaps as well) we could stick with what we have—those facts about human nature and the way human life goes that support the claim that the virtues on the standard list benefit their possessor, and the reading of human history that ascribes our persisting failure to achieve *eudaimonia* in anything but very small patches to our vices. True, it is not easy to hold on to them sometimes; despair and misanthropy are temptations. But we should.[@hursthouse1998 265]

I should not like to deny that human society and many, many human individuals are "a mess." A selected list of the dark side of our species: War, oppression, disease, genetic defect, injury, hatred, vice, a large and growing list of different kinds of injustice. These, also, are empirical facts of anthropology and psychology. I should not like to deny that *things are bad*. I should only like to make space for the possibility that things *are not all bad*. The universal optimist is obliged unrealistically to deny all the dark side of our existence. But the universal pessimist is obliged unrealistically to deny all the light side: peace and freedom, glowing health, genetic order, beauty that persists into old age, love, virtue, and the halting but admirable efforts toward justice and social harmony. 

Below I shall make the case that ethical conclusions can be derived from natural facts about human beings. Here I only wish to make room for the possibility that our data set of such facts cannot with integrity include all light and sweetness nor all dank and dark cynicism. 

## Human nature is merely a biological concept

As for the second worry, some will say that humans are mere mammals, and that is the end of it. Stephen Brown argues that ethics is a descriptive discipline in the end; even virtue ethics, after being appropriately "naturalized", does not *commend* the virtues so much as *detail* the traits which happen to be adaptive for creatures like us to survive and propogate our genotype.[@brown2008virtue; @brown2005really] Although the "characteristic form of life" of human beings involves highly rarified neurological and cognitive processes we do not observe in other animals, nevertheless, nature only reveals one kind of biological concept of nature: a species. And species aim to survive and reproduce. 

My reply is that to say that humans are mammals is an empirical assertion; we exhibit quite a sufficient number of tell-tale properties shared by other mammals: a neocortex, hair, mammary glands, and hearts of a particular form and function.

But to say that humans are *merely* mammals is a profoundly anti-empirical assertion. I even would tendentiously label it profoundly *anti-scientific*. For what we observe of ourselves both "from inside" and "from outside" we exhibit a range of properties not shared by other mammals: sex for pleasure, grammar and language, fire-making, abstract reasoning, science, philosophy, religion, mythology, agriculture. Of course, slippery spatial analogies like "inside" and "outside" admit of multiple senses: "inside" can and often does mean what can be known via introspection (e.g., the way I know what it feels like to be slighted or to be praised, the way I remember the color of my grandmother's house) and what can be known from accepting limitations of a first-personal or second-personal human point of view more generally (e.g., it appears that the sun orbits the earth rather than the other way around; and I know when my mother is upset because I just "know" that look). Looking at things from the "outside" might mean what can be known via sensory perception or what can be known -- if anything -- by pretending to a neutral, objective, third-person, God's eye view.^[Whether we can know anything outside of time and space (such as platonic universals) is of course a large question I don't wish to enter into here.] We can posit counterfactuals, as for example when we speculate what intelligent extraterrestrials would think of humans if they observed and studied our species, with fresh eyes, alongside every other. All that matters for my purposes now is that our species exhibits a range of peculiar activities that distinguish us from mammals, from animals more broadly, and from any other known natural entity in the cosmos -- and that recognizing as much is an *empirical* matter. To deny our uniqueness is possible, after a long inquiry. But to be blind to our uniqueness from the outset is to be subject, in all likelihood, to philistene reductionism that has no more to do with genuine science than does belief in extraterrestrial life.

In a subsequent chapter, I shall attempt to say more about what human nature consists in (spoiler alert: it is our set of rational capacities). My only concern right now is to make space for the plausible notion that the concept of human nature is not easily reduced to the concept of "just another earth-born, carbon-based mammal."

## Human nature is on one side of the Is-Ought Gap
As for the third concern, the is-ought or fact-value gap can be overcome by discovering natural teleological facts from which we can derive ethical or normative conclusions. As Stephen Brown puts it, "Human beings are a species of social animal for which there is a characteristic way of life. An individual human being may be evaluted as good or bad according to how well that individual realizes the human way of life."[@brown2008 1] To get here, Brown argues simply that "there is teleology in nature." And he is right. 

That there is teleology in nature -- enough, at least, to ground an ethics of human nature -- is the case I shall make for the remainder of this chapter. Before I get to that case, I shall give a bit of historical context for the revival of humanistic ethics.

## The revival of virtue ethics

Virtue talk, once a normal part of western cultural and intellectual life, largely faded during (roughly) the last three centuries. Its resurgance in the last 60 years has been well documented. Today, about one fifth of analytic philosophers self-identify as adhering to "virtue ethics".[@chalmers2014philosophers] Not everyone is impressed, of course, with the alleged benefits of virtue ethics; not everyone agrees that "virtue ethics" is a valid category anyhow.[@nussbaum1999virtue. Nussbaum argues that we should talk less about virtue ethicists and more about neo-Humeans, neo-Kantians, neo-Aristotelians; and talk more still about their substantive views about the role of reason in morality, the role of emotions and desires and other sub-rational psychological phenomena, and their moral views.] Nevertheless, this figure is remarkably high, given the notorious difficulty of achieving ethical and metaethical consensus and given the long dominance, in academic philosophy at least, of Kantian and Utilitarian theories of morality (to say nothing of the various brands of moral skepticism). 

Howe are we to explain the resurgance of virtue talk? One interpretation is that something is profoundly wrong with modern moral philosophy. Perhaps it was disastrously wrong for Enlightenment and post-Enlightenment thinkers to turn away from tradition, from religion, from the messy realities of human life in an attempt to construct a universal, abstract, Apollonian, rational theory of morality. On this interpretation, the flexibility of Aristotle and the humanism of Confucious provide a refreshing alternative to the stolid rationalism of Kant or Mill. ^[This interpretation, of course, is a substantive moral thesis couched in the language of a historical thesis. So it is debatable whether this story is even true *as history*. I shall try to remain neutral about the history and discuss the substantive theory.]

Rosalind Hursthouse disputes this interpretation. She thinks virtue ethicists presented their views as *rivals* to the dominant moral theories only because, in the early days, it needed to fight for a position at the table. Now that virtue ethics has a respectable place in our taxonomy of philosophical ethics, such rivalry is needlessly combative. 

The second interpretation (which Hursthouse seems to favor) is that virtue talk can and does enrich Kantian and Utilitarian or more broadly consequentialist ethical theories. Kant himself had a theory of virtue. Julia Driver, Ben Bradley and others have been working to articulate a theory they call “virtue consequentialism” or “character consequentialism”. In contrast to “act” or “rule” utilitarianisms, virtue consequentialism describes virtues as those traits whose possessors tend to bring about the most desirable consequences. Virtue concepts such as temperence and justice are both potent and flexible. They are potent enough to supply resources concepts of duty or pleasure cannot supply on their own; yet they are flexible enough to accommodate varying substantive views of what justice is and why it is morally admirable. Certainly, one useful way of distinguishing (say) the ethical theories of Elizabeth Anscombe and Christine Korsgaard would be to point out that Anscombe makes heavier use of the term 'virtue' while Korsgaard makes heavier use of the term 'duty' or 'imperative'; but their theories can be distinguished in more useful detail by contrasting (say) Anscombe's emphasis on the need for moral psychology and a theory of action with Korsgaard's argument that the need to be moral arises out of our reflective, practical identity.

My own view is that Elizabeth Anscombe, Bernard Williams, Alasdair MacIntyre, Iris Murdoch and others have indeed corrected certain myopic tendencies of modern morality. Martha Nussbaum argues that "virtue ethics" is a misleading category, but that there are three features of “common ground” between those ethicists who talk about virtue including Kant and Mill and Sidgewick. Her three features are the notions that moral philosophy is (a) about the agent (not just individual choices or actions), (b) about motives, emotions, and settled character traits, and (c) the whole of life.[@nussbaum1999virtue 170] “Even though a concern for motive, intention, character, and the whole course of life was not in principle alien to Kantian and Utilitarian philosophy, it was certainly alien to most British and American Kantians and Utilitarians of the period.”[@nussbaum1999virtue 173] Martha Nussbaum argues that the “common ground” between even diverging views is that we cannot construct a complete ethical theory by discussing only “isolated moments of choice”[@nussbaum1999virtue 174] 

So Anscombe et. al., have reminded us that the first question of philosophical ethics is "How am I to live?" This question is not an optional one for normal, reflective, adults. This question is not an avoidable one for those who face major problems in life. We need to refocus our arguments in philosophical ethics from looking just at individual choices or actions (viewed from the outside, like a moral critic) to looking at the whole of life (viewed from the inside, like a moral agent). 

A second myopic tendency whose correction helps explain the resurgance of virtue talk is the re-introduction of historical consciousness into philosophical ethics. Many of the neo-Aristotelians studied classics or history in addition to (or prior to) ethics. Long familiarity with cultures, places, and times other than one's own has a salubrious effect of helping one to see one's own culture and time. (I remember, after my first visit to Mongolia, whose capital city has only one department store, coming back to California and marvelling at Wal-Mart.) Likewise, philosophers who have spent long hours conversing with Aristotle or Aquinas are likely to notice more easily the assumptions, biases, strengths, and weaknesses of our own modern context. Jack Weinstein observes that Alasdair Macintyre did for ethics what John Rawls did for political philosophy: where Rawls re-invigorated political philosophy, “inaugurating the dominance of late twentieth-century liberalism”[@weinstein2003macintyre 38], MacIntyre helped to re-invigorate analytic ethical philosophy (especially the ascendancy of late twentieth-century virtue ethics) by freshly examining ethical concepts in light of history.[@weinstein2003macintyre chapter 4.] MacIntyre argues that we can only responsibly use and evaluate practical concepts such as self, practice, *telos*, or virtue when we know our own history. Since *we ourselves*  inhabit a tradition, we must know ourselves *as* inhabitants of a tradition with a past. We will return to these themes in later chapters. 

A third myopic tendency is, as I have suggested above, the tendency to view morality as *either* a set of rules to be followed for their own sake (with no external "point" or purpose) or else a groundless social convention. One could use this disjunction to exhaustively plot many of the moral theories of the last century. Controversies play and re-play the tug-of-war between those who think these moral rules ought to be followed (no matter what!) and those who think these moral rules can be safely ignored. If morality is one piece of a three-part form (mentioned above), then it is possible to see moral rules as neither arbitrary impositions nor bolts of lightning from a clear sky. 

Although Aristotle and others viewed morality in this way, that is not to say that the three-part schematic is *anti-modern* or intrinsically *pre-modern*. For Aristotle himself, humans were rational animals with a particular psychology and set of potentialities, including the endowment of divine nous; our species-wide telos was happiness or eudaimonia. A life of virtuous activity was the means to eudaimonia, and detailed information about the virtues -- both moral and intellectual -- were knowable from tradition and ratified or modified by reflecting on the lives of virtuous Athenian citizens. But the message of the neo-Aristotelians is that we can pick and choose from Aristotle, discarding the bad but saving the good. And the good worth saving is quite a lot. It is not a foregone conclusion that contemporary virtue ethicist will *reject* widespread modern assumptions. Some, such as Murdoch and MacIntyre, did become staunch opponents of certain aspects of modernity. Others, such as McDowell and Hursthouse, become staunch defenders, even while working to enrich modernity with pre-modern tradition. 

To put matters glibly, we might say that modern science was, in many ways, a turn away from the human toward the cosmic and natural. Modern politics and ethics, on the other hand, was a turn toward the human (often to the exclusion of the cosmic and natural!) While each turn had its merits, each was subject to excess. The resurgance of virtue talk can be explained in part, I think, by a desire to correct both of these excesses at once. What would it be like to include the "human sciences" (wissenschaftes) within science and to include the natural and cosmic in our politics and ethics? The neo-Aristotelian answer is that such an ethics would have to begin with an examination of human nature. In this way, it is easy to see why it is included under the metaethical banner of "ethical naturalism". 

## Is neo-Aristotelian naturalism... naturalistic? 

This point of philosophical taxonomy surfaces a problem. It is worthwhile to explain a problem with the neo-Aristotelian project here. To see it, consider the way James Lenman summarizes neo-Aristotelianism as a version of "moral naturalism":

>One important school of thought ... [is] work is inspired by that of Aristotle. This view has its roots in the writings of G. E. M. Anscombe, P. T. Geach and the early Philippa Foot among others. Its contemporary representatives include the later Foot, Rosalind Hursthouse, Martha Nussbaum and Judith Jarvis Thomson. As this list makes clear, this is very much the official metaethical theory of the main current in contemporary virtue ethics. [@sepmoralnaturalism. Lenman acknowledges that Thomson might need to be subtracted from this list and that John McDowell might need to be added.]

Lenman does not quite know what to do with neo-Aristotelian naturalism. And he is not alone in that. 

Two important metaphilosophical confusions lurking behind these innocuous distinctions. The first confusion is the close tie between neo-Aristotelian naturalism and virtue theory, which seems to blur the line between ethics and metaethics. Lenman seems bemused when he says that neo-Aristotelianism "the official metaethical theory of the main current in contemporary virtue ethics."  For when Foot, Hursthouse, McDowell are classified as virtue ethicists (a normative theory) *and* neo-Aristotelians (a metaethical theory), we might object.  Aren't these two different projects? 

One legacy of G.E. Moore's *Principia Ethica* has been the tendency to sharply distinguish primary ethical questions (about what things are good) from metaethical questions (about what 'good' as an evaluative predicate *means*). Of course, the questions that concern modern metaethicists were posed and discussed by prior thinkers. However, the *Principia* gave a distinctive form to these questions and suggested a distinctive range of possible answers. Moore argued that all previous ethical philosophers had failed to resolve their disputes for a failure to define their terms. The question of what the word ‘good’ *means* (and, possibly the same question, what ‘good’ *refers to*) is distinct from the question *which things are good?* The first question is a conceptual question that aims to define a category. The second question is a substantive or existential question that aims to bring other concepts within that category. Moore argued (or according to some critics, *assumed*) that ‘goodness’ was indefinable.[@frankena1939naturalistic] That is, the good could not be defined in terms of any other property. It is false that ‘goodness is pleasure’  or ‘goodness is whatever is most real’. That we pursue pleasure is a psychological claim, not an ethical one; that we judge something to be real is a metaphysical claim, not an ethical one. 

If the good is indefinable, then any attempt to define it is going to fail. Any attempt to reduce the concept to a concept of lesser intension, or to translate it it as a concept, commits the “naturalistic fallacy.” Moore is clear that the naturalistic fallacy isn’t *just* the error of defining the good as a natural property (such as the pleasant) but also the error of defining the good as a metaphysical or supernatural property (such as the Really Real, or the Divinely-Ordained). 

The neo-Aristotelians are pretty universally critical of Moore's arguments here. Philippa Foot and others dispute his starting points, as we shall see. So the first reply to Lenman as to whether normative ethics and metaethics are two different projects is that they are not *necessarily* the same project. One's choice of philosophical taxonomy will reflect one's substantive views about ethics. As Alan Gibbard says: 

>Moore stressed the distinction in ethics between questions of meaning and questions of substance, and thereby gave rise to a tradition in analytic philosophy of separating the two parts of ethical theory: the metatheory and the substantive, normative part. Some philosophers have rejected the distinction; some Kantians, for instance, think that if you get the metatheory right, substantive ethical conclusions fall out as some kind of consequence, so that metaethics and substantive ethics are not really separate. Then too, anyone who rejects Sidgwick's and Moore's indefinability claim and thinks that ethical terms can be given analytic, naturalistic definitions thinks that the two putative subdivisions are not really separate. Those who reject any systematic distinction between questions of meaning and questions of substance might likewise reject a sharp, separate subject of metaethics.[@gibbard2003normative %%]

Furthermore, even those who maintain that ethics and metaethics are "separate" projects betray connections between the two. For example, we might notice the conspicuous connection between supposedly "neutral" metaethics and first-order consequentialism: G.E. Moore, J.L. Mackie, Frank Jackson, Richard Boyd, Peter Railton, Simon Blackburn, and Alan Gibbard all endorse consequentialism. (We might even echo Lenman and call moral naturalism the "official theory of a main current in contemporary consequentialism.") Furthermore, even if a procedural, non-substantive approach to metaethics can be made neutral with respect to normative ethics, it is still admirably ambitious to construct a theory that pays attention to both. Darwall agrees. His (2003) essay summarizes the history of analytic ethics since Moore, and persuasively argues "that although metaethics and normative ethics are properly focused on different issues, they need to be brought into dynamic relation with one another in order to produce a systematic and defensible philosophical ethics. This mutual dependence is owing to the fact that issues of normativity are at the center of the concerns of both metaethics and normative ethics."[@darwall2003should] 

In sum, the answer to Lenman's first confusion is that the ethical and metaethical dimensions of neo-Aristotelianism are inseparable. My thesis is squarely and ethical argument concerning what character traits are worth pursuing (virtues) and what traits count as virtues (practical wisdom). However, an adequate defense of my thesis requires me to assess more broadly metaethical considerations such as  status of human beings as normative creatures who evaluate themselves and others and who reflect upon what they have reason to do or to abstain from doing.

Lenman's second confusion is an uncertainty with respect to who actually deserves the title of "naturalists". Lenman is not sure who counts, pointing out in a footnote that Thomson probably shouldn't be on this list and that John McDowell probably should. He says "McDowell is certainly pervasively inspired by Aristotle and he describes himself as a naturalist. See especially his 1995. But I suspect many philosophers would find his use of the term  'naturalist' here somewhat Pickwickian."[@sepmoralnaturalism]  The confusion arises because Lenman and others[@rehg2003conceptual; @hacker2009natural; @hacker2009human] are not sure that neo-Aristotelian "naturalism" is "really *naturalism*" at all. 

If it is naturalism, does that entail that happiness is simply a natural state, like health or pleasure? And if so, are the means to that end discernible through statistical analysis of causal relations between acts and their consequences? If it is not naturalism, then why talk about the facts human nature at all? 

The fault line here separates two contrary ways of understanding what *nature* is. Put differently, the fault line separates two ways of understanding the fact/value dichotomy.[@putnam2002collapse] The assumption of Lenman (and others) is that nature is purely descriptive, with no "ought". But Aristotle and the broad Aristotelian tradition deny that the fact-value dichotomy is absolute. They conceive of *nature* as including everything that *is and ought to be.*^[As I understand it, the paradoxical notion of "what really is what ought to be" is a good way of summarizing the notion of natural law.] Briefly, for Moore nature as including everything that *is* but not what ought to be -- all facts, no values. Moore and those influenced by him, both naturalists and non-naturalists, have agreed with the underlying assumption that "nature" is purely descriptive. But what if this assumption is mistaken? Surely we cannot let a deeply-held assumption stand without scrutiny. For Aristotle, nature is some facts, some values. So norms and prescriptions can be just as natural as facts and descriptions. If normativity (*what ought to be*) is natural too, then it might be possible that *human nature* grounds ethical facts. And this is just what virtue ethics says. 

We have to consider the hypothesis: what if metaphysical and biology facts are just as natural as some ethical facts? What if the fact/value dichotomy is not absolute and inviolable? Then there might be a tight fit -- perhaps an inextricable tie -- between Aristotelian virtue theory and the metaethical view labeled neo-Aristotelian naturalism. And neo-Aristotelian naturalists argue that nature is or can be normative. 

Now, those who think the fact/value dichotomy really is most accurate may squirm at this hypothesis. They might just double down and insist that metaethical theory is utterly procedural and not substantive -- they might insist that it is utterly neutral with respect to normative ethical theories. Certainly this is a widespread belief. I shall try to make the case below.  

Annas distinguishes two sorts of naturalism, one that emphasizes the biological nature of humanity (at the expense of reason’s odd normativity) and another that emphasizes the rational nature of humanity (at the expense of biology’s descriptively).[Annas, "Virtue Ethics: What Kind of Naturalism?" in @gardiner2005virtue] Christopher Toner distinguishes between the “biological naturalism” of Thompson and Foot (and Hursthouse) on the one hand from the “second naturalism” or “excellence naturalism” or or ‘culturalism’ of McDowell and MacIntyre, each of which has its strengths and problems. 

For my part, I shall assume that 'nature' or 'natural' refer to familiar objects and properties that exist in the cosmos today: people, stars, trees, penguins, bacteria, and their properties, like 'being an animal', 'bright,' 'green', 'being countershaded for camoflauge,' and so on. I take my thesis that nature is normative to be *naturalistic* in the broad sense: I propose to use only philosophical and scientific methods to observe and explain natural phenomena; I bracket divine revelation or the existence of supernatural beings; and I warmly welcome the unrestricted definition of nature as *all there is*[Cf. @fink for for the best discussion I know of on all the many (many!) varieties of the word 'nature' as it occurs in philosophy.] and hence that humans are continuous with nature.[@brown2008virtue 1-2]  By 'normative' I mean what involves statements not only descriptive judgments of what is but judgments about what *ought to be* or *ought not to be*. As Alan Gibbard says: 

>[P]art of what's special about morality is that it operates in the ‘space of reasons;’ it concerns justification and oughts. The term ‘normative’ is central to much current philosophical discussion. There's no agreement on what this technical term in our discipline is to mean, but it involves, in a phrase drawn from Sellars, being somehow ‘fraught with ought’.[@gibbard2003normative]


## Conclusion and transition

Neo-Aristotelians are one part of the growing revival of virtue ethics. I have tried to show why that revival is so popular (as far as any philosophical movement is popular) and make space for its core assumptions. Now I must proceed to defend the first premise of an ethical theory grounded in human nature: the premise that natural facts can be normative. Not all of nature, of course; I do not wish to defend the notion that "everything has a purpose", including stars and rocks, as if the cosmos were an orchestra being played. But at least some natural entities -- especially living organisms -- have ineliminable, irreducible, normative properties. For (1) some "generic statements" about natural kinds and their properties are both descriptive and fundamentally normative or teleological (for example, "penguins are birds", or "eyes are adapted for seeing"); and (2) some such statements are true. If these premises are true, then nature is normative, and we can know as much with the same ease by which we know that penguins are birds. My end game, pursued in later chapters, is to use generics as premises in arguments with ethical conclusions. It is, in some real sense, true, even without anthropomorphizing, that eyes ought to see.

## Can natural facts be normative? 

It is no secret in philosophy that to prove one's thesis one must begin by assuming, on the first page, a premise which necessarily entails one's conclusion.  Such reasoning is, in one sense, circular and so may appear vicious: *Why should I grant your first premise?* the reader might ask. But in another sense it is not vicious. For any case intended to establish that *P* must take some point Q or R as a hypothesis. Even if one tries to establish that Q or R, one will do so by assuming S or T, and the problem reiterates. If nothing is granted, nothing can be proved. 

The consequence of this reflection is that a great deal depends upon one's choice of starting premises.  My starting premise is this: **some generic statements are true.** That is, some of our empirical observations, and our rational reflection upon such observations, and our conclusions in the form of "generics" (to be explained below) which are scientific conclusions derived upon such reflections and observations, are true.

So for example, I observe that the penguins appear to be birds (they have beaks, feathers, lay eggs, emit squawks, etc.). I reflect that most -- if not all birds -- have many of these macro features. I consult my encyclopedias, biology or zoology textbooks, or friends who are zoologists, and ask them whether penguins indeed are birds. They all confirm the categorization. From observations and reflections such as these, penguins earned an entry in the annals of scientific knowledge. They get a scientific name ('sphenisciformes'), a somewhat speculative evolutionary history, and increasingly detailed descriptions of their characteristics, genetics, environments, diet, predators, and so on. The scientific conclusion, upon initial observation, bolstered by reflection, is the statement that: penguins are birds.

Another term for what I have called 'scientific generic statements' is generic statements, Aristotelian categoricals[@foot2001natural], natural-historical statements.[@thompson1995representation; @thompson2008life] What are these things? Consider the statement "all wolves hunt in packs." Logically, the proposition expressed in this statement is neither strictly universal nor strictly particular. It is not a strictly true universal judgment (for some wolves hunt alone, and some don't hunt at all). Furthermore, it is true but trivial that *some wolves hunt in packs*. The logical form of "all S's φ" does not predicate φ-ing to all members of the category S without exception, nor does it simply assert that some S's φ, which is true but uninteresting. The statement that "wolves hunt in packs" is only interesting if it is an item of conceptual knowledge about wolves as a *kind*. 

Andrew Bailey's recent paper arguing for animalism defines the thesis "we are animals" as a generic. He summarizes generics in the following way: 

>What are generics? A fine question, but a difficult one. Start with this sentence: [all ducks lay eggs.] This first sentence is, let us suppose, true. So far so good. But is it equivalent to ‘for every x, if x is a [duck], x [lays eggs]? ‘ducks lay eggs’ may be true even if not all ducks lay eggs, ‘mosquitos carry dengue fever’ may be true even if only a very few mosquitos carry that virus, and so on). We are now positioned to observe one curious property of generics: they admit of exceptions.[@bailey2015animalism 869]

An exception to a universal judgment proves the judgment false. If a geometrician were to discover an exception to the proposition "All squares have four right angles", then the statement would be simply false. By contrast, exceptions do not disprove Aristotelian Categoricals. But if a biologist discovers an exception to the proposition "All reptiles lay eggs", then either the statement is false or she has discovered a new species of reptile that does not lay eggs. Confining ourselves to particular judgments like "Some reptiles lay eggs" would be radically unambitious science. 

Much of our conceptual knowledge consists in generics.[@prasada2013conceptual] Generics are not, strictly speaking, universal statements (since they admit of exceptions without falsification). They are not merely statistical regularities: suppose it is true that California condors can fly at speeds of  50 mph. Nevertheless, it might be that all the remaining members of an endangered species are injured, old, or diseased and so none of them exemplify this attribute. It is strictly true of the individuals of the species that *none* can fly at speeds of 50 mph; nevertheless is still true conceptually that "condors" can fly at speeds of 50 mph. 

The first point is that **some generic statements (about natural entities and properties) are true.** For example, "penguins are birds"; "the black and white countershading pattern of penguin feathers helps them hide from predators"; and "penguins can swim up to 4 miles per hour"; "reptiles lay eggs"; "eyes are for seeing", and so on.

How do we discover such generic truths? The same way we develop conceptual knowledge of anything in nature: by observation, reflection, experimentation, induction, etc. I believe germs cause disease because experts say so, but I believe penguins are birds and eyeballs enable sight because I have seen such creatures myself and inferred such truths. 

Although there certainly remain interesting and important details of generics to be worked out, to deny that generics are true and a significant bulk of our conceptual knowledge renders one unable to say much at all. 

Suppose for *reductio* that no generic statements are true. Then eyes are not for seeing, penguins' countershading does not help them avoid predators, and we must deny that normal penguins can swim up to 4 miles per hour. Such denials are, I think, absurdities.^[That is not to say that the denial is not worth considering. It might well be true. My point in calling the denial 'absurd' is to say that if it is true, an absurdity is true. If it is true, then the truth is absurd. And reality itself might well be absurd. I don't think it is, but there have been many philosophers who have thought so, and such thoughts cannot be justly dismissed without consideration. The absurdist (let us call her) who thinks all such scientific statements are systematically false would cheerfully deny that "penguins are birds", that "eyes are for seeing" and that "humans are mammals." She would renounce the bizarre belief that the earth orbits the sun or the unconscionable faith that earthquakes are caused by tectonic plate shifts. She is free to deny my thesis.]

## Some generics are teleological or functional truths

The notion that **generics are fundamentally normative** needs some arguing. Examples: "a penguin that cannot swim up to 4 miles per hour is either immature, injured, or defective"; "a lone wolf is not a normal wolf";  "eyes that do not see are either not fully developed, or injured, or ill. Since we know that "eyes are for seeing" we know that eyeballs that cannot see are *defective*.

A critic who wants to affirm that some generics are true must, I believe, affirm that some generics are normative. We cannot say that generics are not normative without simply saying all generics are false. But neither can we rationally say that all generics are false. For generics constitute an astonishing percentage of our conceptual knowledge.[@prasada2013conceptual] No sooner have I been told that penguins are birds than I am told "All penguins are countershaded for camouflage – that is, they have black backs and wings with white fronts." Talk of being shaded *for camouflage* is, of course, normative talk. Such talk is, more specifically, teleological talk. Natural teleology makes possible scientific, evaluative statements.  

I see two paths forward: denial and acceptance. The first path would be to deny that generics capture the truth about nature and attempt to explain their ubiquity in another way, or to deny that statements about human nature are analogous to generic statements about plants and animals.[See @mayr1992teleology for an attempt to disambiguate the term 'teleology'; see @jackson1998metaphysics for an attempt to render reduction of normative to non-normative facts at least conceivable; see @millikan1989defense for an attempt to reduce the kind of teleological functions we seem to "read off" natural entities to an empirical history; and see @barham2011 for a counterargument to Millikan.] For instance, John McDowell defends a view that humans partake in morality (and rationality) by their "second nature" rather than primary, bald nature. Alternatively, one could attempt to reduce natural normativity to some other, broader, non-normative category. But McDowell is also far more comfortable than I am in denying that natural facts such as "penguins are birds" are "given" truths of nature available to the human mind without an idealist interpolation.

The second would be to accept that much of our conceptual and scientific knowledge of nature takes the form of generic knowledge: knowledge about kinds, categories, properties, and patterns that are neither universal nor merely statistical regularities. Some take this path. For instance, The small but intrepid group of philosophers currently carrying this banner are *moral naturalists* of the neo-Aristotelian variety, like Peter Geach[@geach1977virtues] and Foot[@foot2001natural], and [@brown2008]. 

As a final reason to defend the view that teleological generics are rationally permissible within our modern context. James Barham's recent work has argued that 'teleological realism' is a rationally permissible view to take on biology.[@barham2011] The very word 'teleology' is liable to sound quaint to modern ears. Barham clarifies the range of terms that denote identical or similar concepts: 

>"By “teleology,” I have in mind such words and concepts as “purpose,” “end,” “goal,” “function,” “control,” and “regulation,” as well as the real- world biological phenomena to which these words and concepts refer. This means that the word “teleology” should always be construed here in its internal or “immanent” sense—purposiveness existing in living beings themselves—and never in its external or “transcendent” sense of an overarching cosmic principle" (Barham 1). For a similar distinction, see Lennox (1992) and Brown (2001). 

We can add "purposive" and "goal-directed" to the constellation of concepts in the offing. 

Teleological realism in biology is making a come-back. There are those who protest teleological nihilism. Arnhart persuasively argues that teleology is assumed in medicine.[@arnhart1988] Zammito clarifies ongoing relevance in biology, since organisms seem to be intrinsically purposeful.[@zammito2006teleology] Barham continues: 

> In a series of important articles and books over the past decade or so, Bedau (1990, 1992a, 1992b, 1993), Cameron (2004), Christensen & Bickhard (2002), Jacobs (1986), Manning (1997), Maund (2000), McLaughlin (2001, 2009), Mossio et al. (2009), Mundale & Bechtel (1996), Nanay (2010), Nissen (1997), Perovic (2007), Walsh (2006), and Zammito (2006) have cast grave doubt on the coherence of any reductive analysis of function. Some of these authors (e.g., Jacobs, Maund, Zammito) call explicitly for a reconsideration of the possibility that teleological phenomena in biology might be both objectively real and irreducible. 

Thomas Nagel is a third who has followed out the argument for natural teleology from a much broader, cosmic perspective, though he too denies that the cosmos is like an orchestra being played.[@nagel2012mind] Though Nagel took a lot of heat for his argument, Michael Chorost's review of *Mind and Cosmos* reminds readers that natural teleology is not so scientifically heretical as it might first seem. He says: 

> Natural teleology is unorthodox, but it has a long and honorable history. For example, in 1953 the evolutionary biologist Julian Huxley argued that it's in the nature of nature to get more advanced over time. "If we take a snapshot view, improvement eludes us," he wrote. "But as soon as we introduce time, we see trends of improvement."... [the furthermore] paleontologist Simon Conway Morris, at the University of Cambridge, has argued that natural structures such as eyes, neurons, brains, and hands are so beneficial that they will get invented over and over again. They are, in effect, attractors in an abstract biological space that pull life in their direction. Contingency and catastrophe will delay them but cannot stop them. Conway Morris sees this as evidence that not only life but human life, and humanlike minds, will emerge naturally from the cosmos: "If we humans had not evolved, then something more or less identical would have emerged sooner or later."[@chorost2013thomas. Chorost argues that Nagel did not "go wrong" in his thesis but in presenting it philosophically without engaging the support from relevant scientific literature.]

If scientists can countenance natural normativity via natural teleology as respectable, cannot we philosophers do the same? Certainly natural teleology is out of fashion; but the winds of intellectual fashion blow hither and yon, and we may yet discover that Aristotle was right.[@johnson2005] Either way, philosophers of various schools (metaphysicians and ethicists) would do well to dialogue with biologists and cosmologists to come to grips with the possibility that our best evidence suggests that nature is normative.

All I have tried to show is that *some* of these generics are true. To those who disagree about the *nature* of generics, I have tried to urge them to feel free to do so, but to count the cost. The great cost of throwing out generics *as a class* threatens to throw out a huge percentage of scientific statements in biology, organic chemistry, anthropology, psychology, sociology, economics, anatomy, and medicine. I have not yet tried to show which true generics about humans can serve as the basis for an ethical theory. That shall be the task for the next chapter. 