
#Chapter 1: The Project of Neo-Aristotelian Ethical Naturalism

## **Chapter 1. The Project of the Neo-Aristotelian Ethical naturalism.**  This chapter sets up my project. It situates virtue ethics and the neo-Aristotelians in their historical and philosophical context. This chapter also lays out my understanding of the distinction between ethics and metaethics, my key terms, methodological strategies, and assumptions, as well taking care of some other philosophical housekeeping. The primary thesis of this chapter is that facts about human nature are good grounds for discovering moral facts about how we ought to behave and who we ought to become. 

## Introduction

The neo-Aristotelians all want to base ethics in human nature. Such a project may seem on the face to be a non-starter. Most broadly, morality is a fact of human anthropology. As far back as our recorded history goes, we find our race with notions of right and wrong, good and bad, advisable and ill-advised, wise and foolish. As a race we are ‘fraught with ought.’ Almost as many ways as could be devised to explain the phenomenon of morality have been offered. 

Taking as wide a swath as possible, morality is either: a natural law given by God to all human hearts (St. Paul); a series of commandments given by various gods so that we may appease them in the way they especially prefer (Euthyphro); a virtually arbitrary set of social conventions imposed by the weak upon the strong to prevent the strong from imposing whatever virtually arbitrary set of social conventions they wish upon the weak (Callicles, Nietzsche); a set of natural behaviors and attitudes that lead to human flourishing (Aristotle); a necessary law governing the way that that all finite rational beings as such must necessarily relate to each other in community (Fichte); a set of rules a sovereign creates in order to bind many men into one society to free them all from the nasty and brutish life outside of society (Hobbes); the order of nature itself, both transcendent and immanent, as exemplified in human individuals and societies (Laozi); a principle of pure practical reason itself categorically binding on all rational agents as such regardless of their intentions (Kant); a symmetrical form of species-wide selfishness adaptive for group survival but ultimately illusory as regards its claim to objective authority (Wielenburg); a particular type of emotive language expressing our norms, desires, approvals, and disapprovals (Gibbard). 

Philosophical controversies are, as a rule, more intense than even political and social controversies. The philosophical ethicist who wishes to wade into this cacophony must almost require a masochism bordering on morbid. 

Nevertheless, some form of morality is indeed universal among human societies and (so far as we know) among all rational beings. The virtue ethicist must wade in and offer some explanation for why we are moral, why we ought to be moral and ought not be immoral, and (hopefully) some specifics on how to do so. 

The neo-Aristotelian aims to base his or her explanation on human nature. This project risks criticism from quite opposite angles: the Christian moralist may urge that our conceptions of human nature are too flexible, and that after all human nature is fallen and corrupted and is bound to deceive us in our attempt to find a grounding for goodness; the atheist moralist will urge that human nature is far too rigid, that goodness and badness have much more to do with human idiosyncratic approvals and disapprovals than anything “nature” could fix. 

## The Revival of Virtue Ethics
1. Virtue talk has undergone a remarkable resurgence. 
2. In the last 60 years or so, “virtue ethics” broadly construed has garnered the support of  about one fifth of analytic philosophers. This is a remarkably high percentage, roughly equivalent to those who adhere to deontology.[@chalmers2014philosophers.] Not everyone is impressed, of course. But given that in the 1920s, the number of self-described 'virtue ethicists' would probably have been negligible makes this support remarkable. How are we to explain it? 

## How do we interpret this revival? 
4. There are various interpretations. The first is that something is profoundly wrong with modern moral philosophy. On this reading, Aristotle and Confucius provide refreshing alternatives to the stolid, dry, rationalism of Kant or Mill. 
5. But one of our most prestigious living virtue ethicists, Rosalind Hursthouse, disputes this interpretation. Virtue ethics presented itself as a rival during the early fledgling efforts to win a place at the table of modern moral philosophy; now that it *has* a place, such a presentation is needlessly combative. Her alternative interpretation is lent support by the acquisition (or re-acquisition) of virtue talk in other modern moral philosophies. Julia Driver, Ben Bradley and others have been working to articulate a theory they call “virtue consequentialism” or “character consequentialism”. In contrast to “act” or “rule” utilitarianisms, virtue consequentialism describes virtues as those traits whose possessors tend to bring about the most desirable consequences. 
6. A second interpretation of the surprising renaissance of virtue ethics is that virtue concepts are potent and flexible. That is, virtue concepts can be systematized into coherent, stable, theories of their own. But they can also can enrich deontological and utilitarian and contractarian theories.  In fact, they can even help non-philosophers (such as college undergraduate) to avoid damaging vices and to live well. The question "How do I live well?" is, arguably, not an optional one; it arises inevitably for every normal, reflective adult person.

## My interpretation.
8. My own view is that both of these interpretations of the revival of contemporary virtue ethics capture an important truth. On the one hand, those who study virtue ethics can indeed achieve an excellent position from which to critique modern moral philosophy. Long familiarity with cultures, places, and times different from one's own has the salubrious effect of opening one's eyes to one's own culture and time. The philosopher conversant with Aristotle or Aquinas likely to notice and articulate modern assumptions or biases that are invisible to those of us who live in modernity. 

Virtue ethicists are, as a rule, interested in the above three-component view of morality and so have helpful answers to answers posed by inveterate critics of modern moral philosophy such as Anscombe, MacIntyre, and Murdoch. For example, the Aristotelian tradition is uniquely situated to construct an ethical system including all three elements. 

According to Aristotle himself, humans were rational animals with a particular psychology and set of potentialities, including the endowment of divine nous; our species-wide telos was happiness or eudaimonia. A life of virtuous activity was the means to eudaimonia, and detailed information about the virtues -- both moral and intellectual -- were knowable from tradition and ratified or modified by reflecting on the lives of virtuous Athenian citizens. For "neo-Aristotelians" like John McDowell, Philippa Foot, Alasdair MacIntyre, and others, some aspects of Aristotle's three-fold system are correct as is, some need revising and updating, while others need throwing out. Rosalind Hursthouse says that: “Three of virtue ethics' central concepts, virtue, practical wisdom and eudaimonia are often misunderstood. Once they are distinguished from related but distinct concepts peculiar to modern philosophy, various objections to virtue ethics can be better assessed.”[@sepvirtue] These three concepts correspond to the three-element moral system MacIntyre recommends: the practical wisdom is a unique potentiality of humans; eudaimonia is the fullest expression of a human nature as it could and should be; virtue gets us from budding practical wisdom to full eudaimonia. So virtue ethicists are uniquely positioned to satisfy the kind of moral theory MacIntyre recommends. I offer this analysis of the neo-Aristotelians in order to advance the cause of virtue ethics and to defend the pursuit of virtue from various detractors or skeptics. That the triform of virtue, reason, and telos is itself an essential conceptual feature of doing philosophical ethics is one of my claims: to see why this is so, we must only examine virtue absent any concept of practical reason; or examine telos absent any concept of virtue. In the former case, traits that we might intuitively valorize as "virtues" can be shown (not only in imagination by in real world examples) to be corrupted and devastating to moral life and the health of the community -- when the industriousness of a father leads to workaholism, or when the compassion of a nurse leads to dishonesty, or when the legal zeal of a public defense lawyer leads to the unjust acquittal of a dozen wrong-doers. In the latter case, even kind of purposeless life presented in the teleological nihilism of an existentialist like Jean Paul Sartre can be shown to demand virtues: if I am to create my own essence, surely the project will take a strength of resolve, unbending courage, the willingness to overcome the temptation to drown out anxiety in drugs. 
9. At the same time, it is not a foregone conclusion that contemporary virtue ethicist will *reject* widespread modern assumptions. Some, such as Murdoch and MacIntyre, did become staunch opponents of certain aspects of modernity. Some, such as McDowell and Hursthouse, become staunch defenders, even while working to enrich modernity with pre-modern tradition. 

## Ethics and metaethics
11. Does virtue ethics as a normative approach offer anything to metaethics? These thinkers’ task has been to propose cogent normative theories of good and bad, virtues and vices, flourishing and misery that are sensitive to the deep historical virtue tradition rooted in Aristotle, Plato, the New Testament, Aquinas, and many others; but they also trim, augment, and modify these theories sensitive to the current and best natural and human sciences: anthropology, sociology, psychology, and (where applicable), physics, chemistry, evolutionary biology, and cosmology. They have made original contributions on ethical issues such as abortion and happiness as well as ‘meta-ethical’ issues such as moral motivation, moral metaphysics, and philosophy of language. 
13. In recognition of their approach to philosophical ethics, most of these virtue ethicists are also classified as "neo-Aristotelians" with respect to metaethics. There are two important metaphilosophical confusions lurking behind these innocuous distinctions. 
14. To begin to see the confusions, consider the way James Lenman summarizes neo-Aristotelianism as a version of "moral naturalism":
15. >One important school of thought ... [is] work is inspired by that of Aristotle. This view has its roots in the writings of G. E. M. Anscombe, P. T. Geach and the early Philippa Foot among others. Its contemporary representatives include the later Foot, Rosalind Hursthouse, Martha Nussbaum and Judith Jarvis Thomson. As this list makes clear, this is very much the official metaethical theory of the main current in contemporary virtue ethics. [@sepmoralnaturalism. Lenman acknowledges that Thomson might need to be subtracted from this list and that John McDowell might need to be added.]
16. Lenman does not quite know what to do with neo-Aristotelian naturalism. The first confusing fact is the close tie between neo-Aristotelian naturalism and virtue theory.  Lenman seems bemused when he says that neo-Aristotelianism "the official metaethical theory of the main current in contemporary virtue ethics."  For when Foot, Hursthouse, McDowell are classified as virtue ethicists (a normative theory) *and* neo-Aristotelians (a metaethical theory), we might object.  Aren't these two different projects? One legacy of G.E. Moore's *Principia Ethica* has been the tendency to sharply distinguish primary ethical questions (about what things are good) from metaethical questions (about what 'good' as an evaluative predicate *means*). 
17. The second is an uncertainty with respect to who actually deserves the title of "naturalists". Lenman is not sure who counts, pointing out in a footnote that Thomson probably shouldn't be on this list and that John McDowell probably should. He says "McDowell is certainly pervasively inspired by Aristotle and he describes himself as a naturalist. See especially his 1995. But I suspect many philosophers would find his use of the term  'naturalist' here somewhat Pickwickian."[@sepmoralnaturalism]  The confusion arises because Lenman and others[@rehg2003conceptual; @hacker2009natural; @hacker2009human] are not sure that neo-Aristotelian "naturalism" is "really *naturalism*" at all. 
18. Both of these confusions reflect deep fault lines in contemporary philosophical ethics. In brief, the fault line separates two contrary ways of understanding what *nature* is. Put differently, the fault line separates two ways of understanding the fact/value dichotomy.[@putnam2002collapse] 
19. Aristotle and the broad Aristotelian tradition deny that the fact-value dichotomy is absolute. They conceive of *nature* as including everything that *is and ought to be.* Briefly, for Moore nature as including everything that *is* but not what ought to be -- all facts, no values. Moore and those influenced by him, both naturalists and non-naturalists, have agreed with the underlying assumption that "nature" is purely descriptive. But what if this assumption is mistaken? Surely we cannot let a deeply-held assumption stand without scrutiny. For Aristotle, nature is some facts, some values. So norms and prescriptions can be just as natural as facts and descriptions. If normativity (*what ought to be*) is natural too, then it might be possible that *human nature* grounds ethical facts. And this is just what virtue ethics says. 
20. The two questions above (about whether neo-Aristotelians are truly "naturalists" and the close tie between neo-Aristotelian metaethics and normative virtue ethics) have the same answer: Aristotle's ethics and his metaphysics (of biology and nature) cannot be easily extricated from each other. The same goes for neo-Aristotelians. There is a tight fit -- perhaps an inextricable tie -- between Aristotelian virtue theory and the metaethical view labeled neo-Aristotelian naturalism. And neo-Aristotelian naturalists argue that nature is or can be normative. Talking as if the fact-value dichotomy is *not* ultimate makes the other sort of naturalist squirm.
21. Now, non-Aristotelians might just double down and insist that metaethical theory is utterly procedural and not substantive -- they might insist that it is utterly neutral with respect to normative ethical theories. Certainly this is the most widespread belief. 
22. Nevertheless, two responses are possible: first, we might seriously doubt this alleged neutrality. For example, we might notice the conspicuous connection between supposedly "neutral" metaethics and first-order consequentialism: G.E. Moore, J.L. Mackie, Frank Jackson, Richard Boyd, Peter Railton, Simon Blackburn, and Alan Gibbard all endorse consequentialism. (We might even echo Lenman and call moral naturalism the "official theory of a main current in contemporary consequentialism.") 
23. Secondly, even if a procedural, non-substantive approach to metaethics can be made neutral with respect to normative ethics, it is still admirably ambitious to construct a theory that pays attention to both. Darwall agrees. His (2003) essay summarizes the history of analytic ethics since Moore, and persuasively argues "that although metaethics and normative ethics are properly focused on different issues, they need to be brought into dynamic relation with one another in order to produce a systematic and defensible philosophical ethics. This mutual dependence is owing to the fact that issues of normativity are at the center of the concerns of both metaethics and normative ethics."[@darwall2003should] I might add that issues of normativity *and nature* are at the center of concerns about both. 
24. These are deep waters. Suffice it to say, for now, that I think Darwall is right here: Moore's legacy is not the last word on the relation between the semantic and metaphysical foundations of moral terms and concepts and the substantive normative questions. And these four tend to agree. Foot and MacIntyre, for instance, begin their books by criticizing Moore for his erroneous starting points. They may all be wrong, but they are on a page together. 

## Moore
25. Metaethics in its modern form began with G. E. Moore’s *Principia Ethica*. Of course, the questions that concern modern metaethicists were posed and discussed by prior thinkers. However, the *Principia* gave a distinctive form to these questions and suggested a distinctive range of possible answers. We shall see how Philippa Foot and others dispute the validity of that form and that range. For now, it is better to summarize a bit of Moore’s thinking and the legacy his thinking created. Moore argued that all previous ethical philosophers had failed to resolve their disputes for a failure to define their terms. The question of what the word ‘good’ *means* (and, possibly the same question, what ‘good’ *refers to*) is distinct from the question *which things are good?* The first question is a conceptual question that aims to define a category. The second question is a substantive or existential question that aims to bring other concepts within that category. 
26. Moore argued (or according to some critics, *assumed*) that ‘goodness’ was indefinable. That is, the good could not be defined in terms of any other property. It is false that ‘goodness is pleasure’  or ‘goodness is whatever is most real’. That we pursue pleasure is a psychological claim, not an ethical one; that we judge something to be real is a metaphysical claim, not an ethical one. 
12. If the good is indefinable, then any attempt to define it is going to fail. Any attempt to reduce the concept to a concept of lesser intension, or to translate it it as a concept, commits the “naturalistic fallacy.” Moore is clear that the naturalistic fallacy isn’t *just* the error of defining the good as a natural property (such as the pleasant) but also the error of defining the good as a metaphysical or supernatural property (such as the Really Real, or the Divinely-Ordained). 
13. Moore argues that whatever is good intrinsically can be known by direct moral perception. Whatever is good instrumentally can be known a posteriori through probabilistic reasoning about causal links between actions and their effects. Whatever necessarily brings about (or tends to bring about) intrinsically good states of affairs is instrumentally good. Intrinsic goods, for Moore, are three: aesthetic pleasure, friendship, and knowledge.
14. As Alan Gibbard says: 

>Moore stressed the distinction in ethics between questions of meaning and questions of substance, and thereby gave rise to a tradition in analytic philosophy of separating the two parts of ethical theory: the metatheory and the substantive, normative part. Some philosophers have rejected the distinction; some Kantians, for instance, think that if you get the metatheory right, substantive ethical conclusions fall out as some kind of consequence, so that metaethics and substantive ethics are not really separate. Then too, anyone who rejects Sidgwick's and Moore's indefinability claim and thinks that ethical terms (p.320) can be given analytic, naturalistic definitions thinks that the two putative subdivisions are not really separate. Those who reject any systematic distinction between questions of meaning and questions of substance might likewise reject a sharp, separate subject of metaethics. Still, in the analytic tradition, the distinction between substantive ethics and metaethics has been tenacious, and even philosophers who doubt it keep falling back into enquiries that seem recognizably metaethical. Highlighting a hundred years of metaethics since Moore's book, then, is entirely appropriate.[@gibbard2003normative]

>The subject that came to be known as metaethics fits awkwardly into philosophical subdivisions. Its central questions concern meanings and concepts, and how to treat these in general is a question not for the peripheral subfield of philosophy that ethics is, but for the ‘core areas’; these are questions for the philosophy of language and philosophy of mind, along with metaphysics and epistemology. The dual nature of metaethics suited Moore himself perfectly: Moore had a novel ethical vision to propound, with its organic wholes in place of hedonism and its stress on the value of taking pleasure in true beauty and true friendship. A correct metaethics, he thought, would clear the way to a correct ethics. He also joined Russell to revolutionize English philosophy in the core areas. Since Moore, metaethics has been driven both by people who want to do ethics and by philosophers of the core areas, who ask whether ethics poses any special problems for their philosophies—for theories of concepts, properties, and the like. Ayer, for instance, found philosophical ethics a nuisance, since it threatened to offer a counterexample to the verifiability criterion of meaning.4 Stevenson worked on metaethics, he told Frankena, because he wanted a subject that Wittgenstein wasn't working on;5 he developed a view he had found in a one-page passage of Ogden and Richards on the meaning of meaning.6 He and Ayer eventually converged on a view that included elements drawn from each of them.7 Those in our recognized canon of the greatest philosophers ever, Plato, Aristotle, Hume, and Kant, all worked seriously both on core areas and on ethics, including what we'd now call metaethics, and their ethical and core area theories are of a piece with each other. We recently sadly lost the great David Lewis, whose interests centered on the core areas but whose work in ethics, metaethics, and social philosophy fills a volume.8 Metaethics by now is a subject that brings together two tribes of philosophers: specialists in (p.321) ethics and specialists in the ‘core areas’. Since most of us can't do both with a specialist's degree of sophistication, this makes for tensions. The ideal in metaethics must be to combine experience and sensitivity in both areas.[@gibbard2003normative]

> Indeed in recent decades, aspects of ethics have begun to enter the core areas. The special features of ethical concepts that Moore stressed are not, many of us now think, special to narrow morality, with its stress on right and wrong, the morally admirable and the blameworthy. We do of course need to understand the concepts of narrow morality, to wield them effectively or to criticize them (as do Nietzsche and Bernard Williams9). But part of what's special about morality is that it operates in the ‘space of reasons;’ it concerns justification and oughts. So, broadly speaking, does epistemology, with its focus on what we have reason to believe. The same goes for questions about sentiments or feelings: what we have reason to admire or be ashamed of. The term ‘normative’ is central to much current philosophical discussion. There's no agreement on what this technical term in our discipline is to mean, but it involves, in a phrase drawn from Sellars, being somehow ‘fraught with ought’. And in recent decades, it has been claimed—even proclaimed as an established finding—that the concept of meaning is normative. It has been held that the concept of mental content is normative, the concept, that is, of what a person is thinking; thus, for instance, the predicate ‘thinks that snow is white’ is, according to some, a normative concept. So not only is metaethics, in some ways, a branch of core area philosophy, with all the privileges and duties pertaining thereto. Crucial parts of the core areas now become branches of metaethics, more or less. What's crucially puzzling in metaethics extends to the puzzling topic of normative concepts in general. That makes for a broader subject matter, the metatheory of normativity, covering concepts of justified belief and justified feelings. The metatheory of meaning and of mental content, the ‘meaning of meaning’, will, if some philosophers are right, be a part of all this. If so, then substantive theory of meaning and mental content are branches of a broad subject, substantive normative theory. Ethics and metaethics expand to take in most all of philosophy.[@gibbard2003normative]

14. Philosophical taxonomy: My thesis is squarely and ethical argument concerning what character traits are worth pursuing (virtues) and what traits count as virtues (practical wisdom). However, an adequate defense of my thesis requires me to assess more broadly metaethical considerations such as  status of human beings as normative creatures who evaluate themselves and others and who reflect upon what they have reason to do or to abstain from doing. I have been consistently drawn to ethics, in part, because it ethical questions often lead in to some of the most interesting philosophical puzzles there are. For me, the mixture of ethical and metaethical work in one inquiry is not a detriment; rather, it excites the imagination. The mixture can be defended on respectable professional grounds as well. I offer a defense in chapter one. 
15. Here is my defense: The hard line difference between metaethics and ethics is not some unquestionable academic dogma but a recent taxonomical hypothesis. In fact, Alan Gibbard has insightfully pointed out that metaethics appears both as a way of doing work within the “core” disciplines of language, metaphysics, and epistemology with an eye to normativity and as a sub-discipline within ethics conscious of the “core” disciplines. [@gibbard insert] By this expansive definition, as Gibbard notes, virtually *everything* is metaethics. Rather than worry overmuch about which questions are normative and which metaethical, I shall trust that the *ethical* import of each binds them together sufficiently to justify their compresence in one inquiry. I prefer to launch onto an inquiry into what virtue is and its relation to practical reason and happiness. 


## A Question about Method: What sort of naturalism? 

In particular, questions about normativity and naturalism plague the neo-Aristotelians. James Lenman worries that McDowell's theory is not "naturalistic" but "neo-Kantian."[@sepmoralnaturalism] Rehg worries similarly about Foot.[@rehg2003conceptual] Is happiness simply a natural state, like health or pleasure? And if so, are the means to that end discernible through statistical analysis of causal relations between acts and their consequences?  Along different lines, teleology it seems is inherently normative. The acorn ought to become an oak tree. Is there any comparison to be made between creatures like snails and oaks who cannot reflect upon and direct their own destinies and us, who can? How do various neo-Aristotelians conceive of humanity, the virtues which are humanity in a state of excellence, and teleology? 

Annas distinguishes two sorts of naturalism, one that emphasizes the biological nature of humanity (at the expense of reason’s odd normativity) and another that emphasizes the rational nature of humanity (at the expense of biology’s descriptively).[Annas, "Virtue Ethics: What Kind of Naturalism?" in @gardiner2005virtue] Christopher Toner distinguishes between the “biological naturalism” of Thompson and Foot (and Hursthouse) on the one hand from the “second naturalism” or “excellence naturalism” or or ‘culturalism’ of McDowell and MacIntyre, each of which has its strengths and problems. 

To some, such allusions to "normativity in general" are liable to sound hopelessly confused. I hope that, to others, the prospect of using ethical arguments to make some progress into normativity in general is an exciting one.  For this project, I do not wish to be perceived as trying to do too much. 


# Chapter 1: Basing Ethics on Human Nature -- Neo-Aristotelian Naturalism

The neo-Aristotelians are placing living well, character ethics, at the forefront of philosophical ethics. 

### Grounding Morality

Very roughly speaking, finding a “basis” for one’s ethical theory is an endeavor that has lead philosophers down several paths. To name just a few: 

1. Religious ethics — good and bad (and right and wrong, etc.), are based upon the will or nature or character of God or gods (Robert Adams);
2. Platonic ethics — good and bad are based upon The Good itself, a supersensible, transcendent reality (Robert Adams);
3. Sentimental ethics — good and bad are based on human inclinations such as “natural sympathy” (Hume, Bentham);
4. Rationalistic ethics — good and bad are based on rationality itself (Kant, Korsgaard); 
5. Ethics as autonomous — good and bad are not “based” on anything,  but are fully brute realities and ethics is an autonomous discipline (Thomas Nagel); 
6. Contractarian ethics — good and bad are based on promises and contracts made within society (Barbara Herman). 
7. Epicurean ethics — good and bad are based off of human pleasure and pain (Peter Singer); 

In some sense, the normative conclusions that fall out of such ethical theories might coincide: all might agree, for instance, that adultery is a disvalue. 

The neo-Aristotelian bases (or tries to base) good and bad upon humanity itself. On the one hand, the attempt to build an ethical theory on human nature might seem foolish: if humanity is a purely descriptive concept that a creature either falls under or doesn’t, then it is hard to see how *normative* conclusions about what one *ought* to do (or be or have or become) can be derived from what one *is*. On the other hand, the attempt might seem redundant: if any of the bases listed above (sentiments, or religiosity, or rationality, or promise-keeping, or the pursuit of pleasures, etc.,) are part of human nature, then it seems that any of the above theories could be described as “basing ethics on human nature.” 


## Can we ground morality in human nature?
Because of reflections like these, we must state a methodological challenge up front: 

**Methodological question:** How much evaluative truth can one learn (about virtues and vices, practical wisdom, etc.) by examining human nature, including our rationality and possibly our natural teleology? 

My argument defends rather optimistic answer to the question: The right way(s) to live is to acquire virtue, especially practical wisdom. This can be known -- in large part -- by examining what human beings are and what they are for. 

And we can infer some evaluative truths from some natural facts. Put differently, this dissertation defense the thesis that some evaluative judgments -- such as that 'virtues are beneficial for humans' and that 'wisdom is a virtue' -- true and can be known to be true by examining human nature, which is practical, rational animals. I defend certain primary normative claims in part by defending the further claim that such ethical truths can be known and justified by reflection upon our nature as practical, rational animals. The facts of *the way we are* supply excellent (indeed, very often overriding) reason for *the way we ought to be*. My thesis quickly runs afoul of Moore's worry, the so-called naturalistic fallacy. But the objection can be overcome.  

## Yes via generic statements

It is no secret in philosophy that to prove one's thesis one must begin by assuming, on the first page, a premise which necessarily entails one's conclusion. 

Such reasoning is, in one sense, circular and so may appear vicious: *Why should I grant your first premise?* the reader might ask. But in another sense it is not vicious. For any case intended to establish that *p* must take some point q or r as a hypothesis. Even if one tries to establish that q or p, one will do so by assuming s or t, and the problem reiterates. If nothing is granted, nothing can be proved. 

The consequence of this reflection is that a great deal depends upon one's choice of starting premises. 

My starting premise is this: **some generic, scientific statements are true.** That is, some of our empirical observations, and our rational reflection upon such observations, and our conclusions in the form of "generics" (to be explained below) which are scientific conclusions derived upon such reflections and observations, are true.

So for example, even by the's terms I observe that the penguins appear to be birds (they have beaks, feathers, lay eggs, emit squawks, etc.). I reflect that most -- if not all birds -- have many of these macro features. I consult my encyclopedias, biology or zoology textbooks, or friends who are zoologists, and ask them whether penguins indeed are birds. They all confirm the categorization. From observations and reflections such as these, penguins earned an entry in the annals of scientific knowledge. They get a scientific name ('sphenisciformes'), a somewhat speculative, half-formed evolutionary history, and increasingly detailed descriptions of their characteristics, genetics, environments, diet, predators, and so on. The scientific conclusion, upon initial observation, bolstered by reflection, is the statement that: penguins are birds.

My premise is that some such statements are true. Alternately, it is false that every such scientific statement is false. 

The denial of my premise is, I think, an absurdity. That is not to say that the denial of the premise is not worth considering. It might well be true. My point in calling the denial 'absurd' is to say that if it is true, an absurdity is true. If it is true, then the truth is absurd. And reality itself might well be absurd. I don't think it is, but there have been many philosophers who have thought so, and such thoughts cannot be justly dismissed without consideration. The absurdist (let us call her) who thinks all such scientific statements are systematically false would cheerfully deny that "suns are stars", "water is H2O", and "humans are mammals." She would renounce the bizarre belief that the earth orbits the sun or the unconscionable faith that earthquakes are caused by tectonic plate shifts. She is free to deny my thesis. 

Every premise is an invitation to a set of readers. Simply by beginning my inquiry with the assumption that "God exists", I invite fellow theists, and repel all but masochistic atheists; by beginning with the assumption that "no god exists", I invite fellow atheists (and repel all but masochistic theists.) 

My premise that some scientific conclusions are true invites fellow scientific realists, rationalists, and empiricists to the inquiry. It disinvites (though they are of course welcome to eavesdrop) philosophers of different persuasions: transcendental idealists, nihilists, scientific anti-realists, and so on. 

Another term for what I have called 'scientific statements' is generic statements, Aristotelian categoricals, natural-historical statements. Andrew Bailey's recent paper summarizes generics in the following way: 

>We treat ‘we are animals’ as a generic... What are generics? A fine question, but a difficult one. Start with this sentence: ‘Buddhists are way into meditation’. This first sentence is, let us suppose, true. So far so good. But is it equivalent to ‘for every x, if x is a Buddhist, x is way into meditation’? It does not appear to be. For the second sentence might be false (some Buddhists might not be way into meditation) even if the first sentence is, as we have supposed, true. The first sentence could be true, somehow, even if not all Buddhists are way into meditation (similarly, ‘ducks lay eggs’ may be true even if not all ducks lay eggs, ‘mosquitos carry dengue fever’ may be true even if only a very few mosquitos carry that virus, and so on). We are now positioned to observe one curious property of generics: they admit of exceptions. Generic animalism, accordingly, may admit of exceptions without threat to its truth; generic animalism is consistent, for example, with the thesis that there are human persons who are not human animals. [bailey2015animalism 869]




### The thesis

Without further ado, my thesis is that some human attributes -- traits, habits, actions -- can be known to be right or wrong because of the natural, scientific, teleological facts about human beings as a species. 

Such a thesis will feel absurd to some readers. I invite them to justify the feeling. In the meantime I shall try to prove that the thesis follows from the assumption that some scientific statements (derived from observation and reflection) are true. Readers are welcome to join the absurdist in denying my first premise; and they are of course welcome to try to find a weak link in the chain of reasoning, though I hope there is none. But if they accept the premise then they are not free -- not free rationally to deny the thesis. 

### The argument in brief

To get from the premise to the conclusion we need a few steps: 

1. Some scientific statements are true. 
2. In general, some scientific statements are normative and evaluative via natural teleology; the have natural species terms as subjects and evaluative terms as predicates.
3. Some subset of these (scientific statements that are normative/evaluative via natural teleology) are true. 
4. Humans can be the subjects of scientific statements; the species 'human' can be the minor term of logical propositions. 
5. Some scientific statements in which 'human' is the minor term have evaluative terms as predicates. 
6. True scientific evaluative statements about humans denote what is right or wrong. 


In short: 

Data: Some true scientific, generic statements about human beings are teleological, normative, and evaluative.

Evidence: If some scientific, generic statements about human beings are teleological, normative, and evaluative, then some human behaviors and traits can be known to be right or wrong because of the natural, scientific, teleological facts about human beings as a species.

Conclusion: Some human behaviors and traits can be known to be right or wrong because of the natural, scientific, teleological facts about human beings as a species.

### The argument

Premise 1 I assume, and take for granted. 

Premise 2 needs some arguing. Here, Philippa Foot's arguments are needed to show that the critic cannot deny 2 without denying premise 1. No sooner have I been told that penguins are birds than I am told "All penguins are countershaded for camouflage – that is, they have black backs and wings with white fronts. A predator (such as an orca or a leopard seal) looking up from below has difficulty distinguishing between a white penguin belly and the reflective water surface. The dark plumage on their backs camouflages them from above." Talk of being shaded *for camouflage* is, of course, normative talk. Such talk is, more specifically, teleological talk. Natural teleology makes possible scientific, evaluative statements. 

Premise 3 follows from 1 and 2. Some scientific statements are true; some evaluative statements are scientific; therefore some evaluative statements are true. 

Premise 4 needs some arguing, but I think it is fairly easy to prove to be true. Since human beings are animals, and all animals are natural entities, human beings are natural entities. 

By calling us 'natural' I do not mean to invoke here all the controversies surrounding the word; more on that below. For now, calling us 'natural' is an innocent truism. Are we here, in nature? Yes. Are we material -- not necessarily *wholly* material, but are we *at least* material at all? Yes. Do we eat food grown on earth, drink water from the earth, are we born from fellow humans and do we die and disintegrate into the earth like every other living thing? Yes. So we are natural. Again, I do not mean to prejudge the question of whether we are *also more than natural*. I simply mean to invoke the obvious that the *we are at least natural*.

Since we are (at least) natural entities, and since scientific statements are about natural entities, then it is possible (and indeed quite common) to make scientific statements about us. 'Humans emigrated from Africa about 200,000 years ago' is a statement about a natural species group, namely *homo sapiens sapiens*, the only extant members of the hominin clade. 'Humans are language users' is a generic scientific statement. 

Premise 5 is, again, not too troublesome. If some scientific statements are evaluative (via natural teleology) and humans can be the objects of scientific evaluative statements, then some statements about human beings are evaluative via natural teleology. 

Statement 6, the conclusion, is true just in case that some scientific statements with evaluative predicates about humans are true. Those statements would give us knowledge of right and wrong based upon what facts about the human species. 


### Premise 2 -- Some scientific statements are teleological. 

1. Philippa Foot and others provide an argument for premise 2. 
2. eneric knowledge is that of which must of our scientific knowledge consists.[@@prasada2013conceptual]
3. There are many kinds of generics, and much more to be learned.
4. Nevertheless, the generic knowledge we have is sure. 
5. Generics are teleological and functional statements. 
6. If we can make those statements about ourselves, we can ground ethical conclusions in facts about human nature. 

### More details of the argument

'Human beings are rational animals' is a generic. It is also evaluative/normative. An *irrational* human is ipso facto defective. To call a human 'defective' sounds like a schoolyard insult; but it is a straightforward, evaluative description of some people. I do not here intend to discuss mental illness, disability, birth defect, chromosomal disorders, and other such exceptions to 'normal' functional humans. 

Can we get from such vague statements to particular moral statements? 'Human beings make and keep promises.' Perhaps. Here is one way such a connection might work. 

From 'human beings are rational animals' we can derive 'human beings are language users' by the major premise that 'rational animals are language users.' This major premise is, I think, eminently plausible. One of the identifiers of rationality of other animals (dolphins, great apes) is simply the presence of language. Language is, I presume, a system of signs; if a crow or even an insect such as a bee can be shown to be using signs, many would conclude that ipso facto those creatures would be rational in some sense. Regardless, the question of whether any other animals besides us are rational is identical to the question of whether any other animal uses language the way we do. 

So what does it mean to be a language user? One of the things language can do is refer to events not yet happened, or events no longer happening. To express intentions to do X or not Y in the future requires language. There is some connection here, perhaps not enough, but some connection between language use and promise keeping. A kind of necessity. 

Ignorance is not good for human beings. 'Rational animals seek knowledge when they have plenty of food, water, and shelter.' is perhaps another safe generic. One might say I am trying to express "the value of knowledge" or some such fluffy phrase, but I am not doing any such thing. I am trying to articulate a true, scientific generic about human beings as they are. Certainly, it is a normative statement; but so is 'lizards seek warm rocks at night time.' One can disagree with the truth value of a statement like 'rational animals seek knowledge' but one cannot throw out the whole category of such statements without also denying my starting premise, that all such scientific statements are systematically false. 

Explorations of 'what rationality *is*' are bound to be controversial. I do not want to develop a fully formed theory of rationality here. I only want to articulate a few possible specific examples of generic statements that (in my terms) are evaluative truths true in virtue of our species, that (in my opponents terms) do double duty as scientific descriptions and "moral" norms. These examples are needed to give some flesh and bones to my primary contention, that there exist *at least some* true scientific evaluative statements about humans. 

One more will suffice here. 'Rational beings seek the good.' I don't mean that we always seek what is *actually* good; a jihadist is seeking a great evil which they have mistaken for a good. Nor does it mean that we *actually* seek what is good; an immoderate, overweight, diabetic person may quite intentionally overeat, knowing how unhealthy it is. A habitually foolish person may spend all her money every time she receives a paycheck, even though she knows she will never be able comfortably to retire. Rational beings seek the good. 


### An initial endgame 

Let's review. Generics are normative/descriptive statements that pick out what is formally true of a species. They are a huge percentage of scientific conclusions derived from observation (both unstructured and experimental observation) and from rational reflection upon such observations. 

I have attempted to find in generics some hope for a naturalistic morality. A statement like 'human beings are rational animals' are both descriptive and normative. They (attempt to) describe human nature as a species rather than merely to observe highly contextualized statistical regularities, such as 'human beings wear jeans and t-shirts'. As such, generics (promise to) overcome the much-touted and much fear fact/value split. Generics render moot Moore's so-called 'naturalistic fallacy.' Generics, being is/ought statements, underwrite 'ought' conclusions with the addition of an 'is' premise: Human beings seek knowledge (that is, human beings do seek it and ought to seek it). Bob is a human being. Bob ought to seek knowledge. 

All I have tried to prove is that *some* of these generics are true. I have not tried to prove finally which ones are true. I chose some examples that I think are true and that I rather hope are not too far-fetched for most of my audience. These examples, though, are illustrative not argumentative. In the next chapter, I shall do a good deal more to try to establish specific propositions that some might describe as "moral precepts" but which I shall describe simply as generic facts about human nature. But for now, I welcome disagreement as to the content of the generics.  

To those who disagree about the *nature* of generics. I have tried to urge them to feel free to do so, but to count the cost. The great cost of throwing out generics *as a class* threatens to throw out a huge percentage of scientific statements in biology, organic chemistry, anthropology, psychology, sociology, economics, anatomy, and medicine. 



### McDowell's Worry about the Given

My argument thus far runs afoul of several objections. The most penetrating is John McDowell. His worry is that by deriving moral or more broadly normative conclusions from "scientific" premises assumes a "given". The problem with assuming a Given is that the Given is a myth. That is, McDowell is an idealist *of a sort* -- even our experiences are colored, structured, or otherwise affected by our own powers of perception and reflection. 

Earlier I caricatured scientific knowledge as observing stuff and reflecting upon it to derive scientific conclusions. McDowell would respond that even our "spontaneous" reflective powers are already embroiled in our empirical observations. 

What are we to say to McDowell? In one sense, I have already said it. McDowell rejects "the Given" in all its forms. Hence he is not a scientific realist. He does not think it true that penguins are birds in the sense that a 'truth' is both the mind-independent reality and the content of a thought that corresponds to reality. He does not think that penguins being birds is a fact about the world as such. Of course, penguins being *classified* as birds is not a fact about the world as such; classification is something (human) scientists do. But he does not think there is a *structure* to the world such that all birds have real properties in common. 

If this is true, he rejects my initial premise: he denies that "some of our scientific conclusions derived upon reflection and observation are true." And my audience cannot follow McDowell there. 

Nevertheless, I think it worthwhile to respond to McDowell and will do so later.



## Conclusion

In the next chapter, I shall try to provide much more detail about human nature. This chapter attempts to show the framework in which those details will fit. 

