## Criteria for Virtue 

1. Evaluting a good human being requires identifying what is characteristic of the species in question. 
2. The set of "characteristic" features of a human being -- the human life-form or nature -- is expressible in generics. 
3. It is possible to express in generic propositions scientific knowledge about the life form and natural teleology of human beings. 
4. By contrast, one might object that human nature is variability itself.  
5. Similarly, one might object that there is no such thing as human nature because there are *no* fixed species or biological natures, or natural kinds. 
6. And one might object that there is no human nature because "natures" belong to lower life forms but not humans. Such animal natures aim at reproduction, not flourishing. 
5. Nevertheless, all humans are (a) animals and (b) practical and rational. 
6. As a generic, the truth of this statement is compatible with variability since variability is a function of practical reason, which is universal. 
7. As a generic or formal truth, the truth of this proposition is compatible with humans failing to become practical or rational due to genetic defect, illness, injury, or injustice. 
8. Another might object that generics about human nature or the human life-form is not ethically relevant, since one is able, by virtue of rationality, to transcend one's nature. The practical point of view is not "scientific", even if it is broadly "naturalistic."
9. The initial response to this objection is that some such properties are ethically relevant while some are not, and that it takes practical wisdom itself to recognize which ones are which. The scientific point of view is not the point of view *from within* the space of law but *about* the space of law *from within* the space of reasons. 
9. McDowell urges this point against "Thompsonian" and Footian naturalism. He thematizes the concept of 'nature' itself. 
10. For McDowell, nature consists of Lockean primary qualities, which are response-independent as well as dispositional properties which are response-dependent. "Values" are the latter sort. There is no such thing as "to-be-pursuedness" existing as a Lockean primary quality in first nature. Nevertheless, values are not merely subjective fantasy. They are intersubjective, grounded in a form of life, grounded in our rationality itself. 
11. McDowell's view here is comprehensible in light of his broader project of anti-metaphysics, therapeutic philosophy, constructivism, and so on. 
12. The problems with McDowell's view are these: (1) McDowell's concept of nature is incoherent. It is both restricted and unrestricted. My view is superior in explicitly adopting an unrestricted conception and paying the conceptual price. (2) McDowell's concept of science is too crassly restrictive; although he disputes the "philistene scientism" of his opponents, he seems to me to endorse just enough philistene scientism to deserve his own criticism. He is a scietific realist on one page and anti-realist on another. And (3) there do seem to be primary qualities of nature such as "danger" and "safe" that are relational and actionable like moral qualities such as good and bad. McDowell's own example admits this but he shies away from the obvious conclusion.
13. It is *not* a problem that McDowell's view is a brand of idealism -- not a problem along naturalistic lines, since idealism can be naturalism, as Fink explains. 
10. Let's specify in more detail exactly what is unique about animals with practical reason. 
11. Humans are alive, move, live, grow, reproduce, and die. They have a history, a nature, and a destiny. 
10. Humans *speak*. They talk, engage in symbol use in social contexts.
11. Humans *act*; that is, they are practical creatures, that self-determine, self-direct, and so on. 
12. Human's *think*; we use terms like 'reason' and ratio as abstractions to describe a set of capacities we notice in ourselves. For example, activities that get called 'rational' are activities such as to observe, perceive as, create, reflect, decide, determine, abstract, infer, explain, deduce, remember, predict, criticize, praise, blame, admonish, and so on. 
15. By the first hypothesis, we should expect this: The qualities of being a good animal, speaking, acting, and thinking well given one's lifeform are, those that from the point of view of the alien anthropologist (a) make one a human being (fully exemplifies the human-life form) (b) make a human being admired by his or her fellows; furthermore, within the moral point of view, (c) one would judge such qualities really admirable -- in other words, such qualities would line up with one's own pre-analytical intuitions about what qualities count as morally praiseworthy. 

## Virtue and Vice
16. Virtues are exactly such qualities. 
17. They are our "good of a kind". This is Thomson's kindism and Hursthouse. This accords with Foot, MacIntyre, and McDowell on virtue. Especially Foot, for whom virtue is beneficial, more than strength, corrective of some tempting vice, and operative only toward good ends.
16. Virtue is beneficial. Virtues are the qualities that makes a person human of the kind of being we are: animal, practical, rational. Thinking, acting, speaking in social and political groups.  Since virtues are -- by definition -- admirable qualities, the virtuous person is the admirable person. It might seem this is empty or tautologous. Another objection is that the very definition of virtue as a *beneficial* or “positive” character trait is circular and therefore empty. To see the problem, suppose we define “boldness” as *doing hard things* and “courage” as doing hard things when it is good. Boldness is, so to speak, value neutral. One can be bold in wrongdoing or bold in doing well. If courage is just boldness in doing good, is this a trivial truth? An analytic truth? The affirmation that ‘courage (doing hard things when it is good) is good’ would appear to amount to the life-altering revelation that 'good things are good'. Response to Empty Definition Objection. The Great Platitudes. 
17. More than strength (acquirable). So who is the admirable person? The admirable person is one who acts well, not just who is lucky; not just one who wins the natural and social lottery but who does a lot with what he or she has. They are acquirable; that is, they are not impossible to acquire but also but not necessarily *acquired.* They are not given. Virtues are not "inborn." To state the objection, first distinguish between what is "given" and what is under the control of a normal, functional, adult human being. Simply put, one's nature is given, and one's choices throughout life are controllable. But what is given in the life of a child includes (at least) one's genetic identity, one's time and place in history, one's culture and tradition, one's parents or guardians. If virtues are first inculcated in a child by tradition and only later acquired by an individual's own initiative, then it seems the dichotomy breaks down. It seems, in short, that the virtues one acquires or fails to acquire are part of the Given. For example, suppose Chivo grows up on a poor farm in rural Mexico in a large, Catholic household with pious parents. He learns not to lie, not to steal, to work hard on the farm, to be kind to his siblings and to have a good time with them. He is inculcated with honesty, respect for property, industry, gentleness, and affability. Perhaps Krishna does not attend school, or only does for a few years. But he learns from his famiily the social and trade skills needed to become a fully functioning member of his rural community. What effect would practical reasoning have on Krishna's life? It seems the answer is 'not much'. Socially, he is poor enough that he is not obligated to make many decisions about travel or entertainment. Religiously, he cannot choose (for many years at least) whether or not to join in the religious rituals of his family. Intellectually, he cannot choose to read many books or write ethical treatises, for farming occupies him for virtually all the daylight hours. 
18. Corrective of some vice. The virtues are universal, not relative to some station of life. By arguing that virtues -- whatever they may turn out to be -- are those qualities needed by practical reasoners, we are not arguing about the *concept* of virtue but that *very qualities themselves*. Any culture, business, family, civilization, will thrive insofar as it is virtuous and disintegrate insofar as it fails. Virtue is necessary because it is human. Justice, prudence, and courage are "needed in any human-scale enterprise"[@geach1977virtues], from motherhood to a successful career, to farming.Put negatively, the thesis of this chapter is that vices necessarily contribute to misery, unhappiness, and human stultification and stagnation. Human nature is the starting point, flourishing is the goal, and the moral and intellectual virtues are the means by which we move from start to goal. Vices are those qualities that partly constitute human misery. Many kinds of living conditions are miserable; excessive cold or heat; starvation; illness; mental handicap; injury; extreme isolation and loneliness, and so on. But these kinds of circumstances are not *always* and *necessarily* miserable. Rather, being a lying, treacherous, scheming, envious, whining, daydreaming moral agent is truly miserable, even such happens to have a comfortable bed to sleep in and enough money to get through life. Such a person is despicable, a worthy specimen of human failure. Some vices, especially intellectual vices, are especially despicable. Not everyone has equal amounts of intelligence conceived as raw mental horsepower. Some children even at a young age excel at doing “mental math” or memorizing geographical names, while others never acquire the knack for it. However, not all unintelligent people are stupid in the deplorable sense: stubborn, unteachable, slow to learn and resenting every bit, arrogant, smug, self-satisfied, and willfully ignorant. Such persons demonstrate intellectual vices noxious to all their fellows except those equally debased, and especially noxious to those unfortunate enough to be their teachers, parents, or guardians. And such intellectual vices are in a special way exemplary of human failing. 
19. It should be clear by now that the pursuit of virtue, and possession of virtue, is not egoistic in a crass way. 
19. Operative toward good end only. **Can virtues be put to bad use?** Virtues are necessarily good for human beings as such. But some of the qualities the moral tradition picks out as virtues can be conceived as being put to bad use. So can virtues remain virtues while in bad use?  Although it seems that virtuous traits cannot be put to bad use, some virtues admit of misuse since the absence of practical wisdom renders traits (like moderation) that really are virtues ineffective at the realization of our human telos. This will require a discussion of practical wisdom. 
12. The sort of naturalism under discussion, then, is biological but not merely biological. It takes biology as necessary but not sufficient; and the practical rationality of McDowell as necessary but not sufficient. 
13. Use moderation as an example: our human nature sets limits to what kinds of qualities will be virtuous for us, will be good-of-a-kind. Begin with Aristotle's justly famous statement of virtue as a mean between extremes: > Let us consider this, that it is the nature of such things to be destroyed by defect and excess, as we see in the case of strength and of health (for to gain light on things imperceptible we must use the evidence of sensible things); both excessive and defective exercise destroys the strength, and similarly drink or food which is above or below a certain amount destroys the health, while that which is proportionate both produces and increases and preserves it. So too is it, then, in the case of temperance and courage and the other virtues. For the man who flies from and fears everything and does not stand his ground against anything becomes a coward, and the man who fears nothing at all but goes to meet every danger becomes rash; and similarly the man who indulges in every pleasure and abstains from none becomes self-indulgent, while the man who shuns every pleasure, as boors do, becomes in a way insensible; temperance and courage, then, are destroyed by excess and defect, and preserved by the mean.[@aristotle *Nic. Ethics* Book II.2] (The first sentence appeals to a fact about "the nature of such things", presumably, the general features of living beings. This is Aristotle's positing of natural normativity.) To be immoderate is to eat or drink so much or so little that it destroy's one's health. Specifically, indulging in "every pleasure and abstaining from none" is a defective choice or defective habit for creatures like us. We can even venture, with the help of health science, a rough approximation of the number of calories (1700-2600) human beings formally need, and an ideal diet of the kinds of foods and drinks through which to intake those calories (variety of fresh fruits, vegetables, meats, fats, nuts, legumes, and so on).

10. Another might object that which properties we pick out as ethically relevant or normative will only be the good ones, but this is the Polyanna Problem. Why those? Is there any justification or is it prejudging a moral judgment?  We should not take the difficulty of discerning which 'natural' impulses and qualities are virtuous and rational as a weakness. It seems rather to me a strength. It allows that "the gods have put sweat between us and virtue." Many people are irrational. Many people are not virtuous. But that is just to say that many people are imperfectly human, and not just by bad luck or misfortune; they are imperfectly actuating the human life form by making bad choices, being ill-informed, being lazy, being greedy. Just as health leads to more health (a healthy organism can eat, digest, and exercise better than its sick counterpart), virtue leads to more virtue (a diligent person is liable to become patient), vice leads to more vice (a lazy person is liable to become impatient). We ought to take care, at the earliest ages, to ensure the zealous cultivation of virtues in ourselves and others.
12. On the other hand, the Polyanna Problem picks out a real shortcoming in recent discussions of virtue ethics. They focus on virtue rather than vice. Kindism picks out characteristic failures of humanity just as much as excellence. 
12. I have argued that virtues are "merely" human, but also argued that that human nature is normative; therefore, the proposition that virtues are normative is deduced from the major premise. There are still problems to be solved; specifically the relation between reason and nature. Chris Toner argues that the natural norms must be intrinsically motivating (or practical), they must be intrinsically able to justify themselves to the bearer of that nature (upon reflection, they seem binding, even if they do not mechanically determine one's action); they must be anchored in and express universal human nature; and first and second nature must be related in such a way that the second nature is an outgrowth of the first so that that in our given makeup is (first) natural which does tend toward an ethically mature second nature. 
13. Virtues are excellent character traits all rational animals need. The virtuous person takes up all that is given and puts it to good use in the resistance to evils and the pursuit of and sustainance of goods, both in individual life and communal life. The virtuous person discriminates between what is morally significant and insignificant, discriminating in what is significant between what is beneficial and harmful to the actualization of rational animals like us.  Vices are corruptions of life that are all-too-common. They are negative or destructive traits to which one is tempted somewhere in the common course of human life. Pleasures tempt us to immoderation; the urges to do favors for friends or to slight enemies tempt us to injustice; danger, difficulty, and other kinds of resistance tempt us to cowardice and *acedia*; laziness, arrogance, and culpable ignorance tempt us to practical foolishness.  Even if this account of neo-Aristotelian virtue is plausible, several questions remain. Let us to queue up the questions to be addressed in a later chapter. 


### Setting up Remaining Chapters

13. These reflections, and the Polyanna Problem, set the task for our remaining chapters: What is the relation between "natural goodness" and "rational virtue", between virtue and reason, between first and second nature, biology and rationality? 

2. **Are the virtues human or cultural?** Virtues must be derived from human nature and exemplify excellence in human nature. But still must all such human actions and excellence be mediated by culture, by "second nature"? Although it seems they are cultural, they are 'human traits' in that they express human nature. MacIntyre does not basis virtue enough in metaphysical biology; Foot bases it too much in metaphysical biology; McDowell bases virtue in reason but does not explain the relation of reason to metaphysical biology. Foot is closest to my view, but I supplement her view with arguments to the effect that normativity (including teleology) is built-in to nature as a whole, not just humanity.

4. **Can the virtuous person be irrational?** Relatedly, virtues are supposed to be actions "in accord" with reason and in accord with human nature. This suggests that the virtuous person cannot be irrational. Although it seems that the virtuous person can be irrational, the virtuous person is by definition rational either (in the primary sense) by reflectively endorsing their own reasons for action in every or almost every significant life pursuit or (in a derivative but no less real sense) by acting in accordance with good reasons, either on good advice from another or on their own, unreflective, habitual, reasons. Practical wisdom, then, has pride of place. There are other virtues besides practical wisdom; Socrates was wrong there. And Maggie Little is wrong to suggest that virtue is knowledge *and nothing more*.^[@little2007virtue  It is not totally clear to me from this essay whether she means to suggest this point or not; but the suggestion is there and she does nothing to counteract it.] But it is correct that wisdom has pride of place. Courage without wisdom ceases even to be courage. This will also require a discussion of practical wisdom.  And to that task we now turn. 

1. **What is our telos?**. The first point is that virtues bring about (and partly constitute a "pre-payment" on) human flourishing. So we would need to say more about our telos and what it would be like to have it realized. Although it seems to be merely pleasure or worldly success, and though I shall define it more later, I mean generally "well-being", true happiness, human success as such.  


## Virtue and Reason in Practical, Rational Animals

1. There is a special tie between virtue and reason. 
2. McDowell defends the old Socratic line that virtue simply is a kind of knowledge.
3. MacIntyre and Foot, though not going this far, do assert a close connection between practical reason and virtue. The next chapter or two will complete what has gone before and address new problems pertaining to practical reason.
4. For McDowell, virtue just is a sensitivity to certain facts as reasons for action. It is a "practical point of view." It is not individualistic, but intersubjective, a congruence of intersubjectivities. McDowell's virtue is practical and also "rational" but not objective. 
5. For MacIntyre, virtues are defined as those qualities that sustain traditions. Virtue is practical and also rational, but objective in an important way that McDowell's version is not. 


## Practical Reason and Practical Wisdom
5. MacIntyre argues that the primary failure of the Enlightenment was the excisement of teleology from reality, human nature, human life, and human practice. This is an error we have already attempted to remedy above.
3. Rationality is constituted by traditions (and constitutes them). 
4. Hence, practical rationality is constituted by a tradition.
5. Traditions are socially embedded arguments over time, rooted in source text, with authorities, and argumenst inside and outside the tradition.
5. What is good to do, what is a good life, are indexed to traditions, the notion of human life, and practices.
6. Practices are complex social activities with common goals, common standards, and the possibility of excellence in achieving those goals within those standards. 
7. Life is a continuous practice or serious of practices in pursuit of a socially-defined good. 
8. Virtues enable success in practices, and enable a flourishing life for persons and communities, and sustain traditions. 
9. Virtue has three layers or dimensions: practices, social institutions, and human life as a whole (within that tradition). 
10. The telos of life is (minimally) to be free to pursue one's telos; it is (maximally) to discover more adequately one's telos. 
11. Virtues enable the achievement of telos, to *know how to live*.
10. Humans are by nature practical reasoners. 
11. Humans are vulnerable and need virtues of dependence as well as "greatness" or magnanimity. 
12. Virtuous communities successful educate their young to become independent practical reasoners who *know* what to do, know what is good, and pursue it, further defining and clarifying what is good. 
13. Some object that MacIntyre vascillates on his definition of virtue.
14. But the practice-relative virtues are relative to traditions and can be judged as a whole.
13. Some object that MacIntyre is a relativist -- there is no "tradition" to ethics and morality.
14. But he argues that traditions can be tested against one another through philosophical imagination; and my own tradition can be tested by my own standards. 
14. Some object that MacIntyre is not relativistic enough -- there is simply no "rationality" to ethics and morality. 
15. MacIntyre argues that reason *begins* in time, place, social context, language, but is not ultimately a slave to these limits; it can transcend them to achieve something like the Enlightenment ideal of universal reason. Traditions can get along, and emotivism, nihilism, are disastrous for human life. 
16. Some (especially the Encyclopediasts) object that ethics can get on well enough without teleology. 
17. The true abandonment of natural and social teleology leads to moral nihilism; the rules without any point. 
18. Most moral theorists (and biologists, psychologists, etc.) do not really abandon teleology except in name. 
19. MacIntyre's critiques are wide-ranging and cut deep; if they are true, much needs to change about university education and the way ethics and morality are studied and taught and practiced. 
20. Even those who disagree are invited to engage in philosophical imagination to examine his rival tradition and examine the flaws and inconsistencies of their own tradition. 

