{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf340
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\vieww19280\viewh15840\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Adams, Elie Maynard. \'93Ethical Naturalism and the Modern World-View,\'94 1973.\
\
Adams, Robert. 
\i Finite and Infinite Goods: A Framework for Ethics
\i0 . Oxford, 2002.\
\
Adams, Robert Merrihew. 
\i A Theory of Virtue: Excellence in Being for the Good
\i0 . Clarendon Press, 2006.\
\
Ahlstrom-Vij, Kristoffer. \'93In Defense of Veritistic Value Monism.\'94 
\i Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
\i0  94, no. 1 (2013): 19\'9640.\
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Moderate Epistemic Expressivism.\'94 
\i Philosophical Studies
\i0  163, no. 2 (2013): 337\'9657.\
\
Annas, Julia. 
\i Intelligent Virtue
\i0 . Oxford, 2011.\
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Virtue Ethics: What Kind of Naturalism?,\'94 2005.\
\
Anscombe, G. E. M. \'93Modern Moral Philosophy.\'94 
\i Philosophy
\i0  33, no. 124 (1958): pp. 1\'9619.\
Aquinas, Thomas. 
\i Summa Theologica
\i0 , n.d.\
Aristotle. 
\i Nichomachean Ethics
\i0 , n.d.\
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Politics
\i0 , n.d.\
Audi, Robert. 
\i The Good in the Right: A Theory of Intuition and Intrinsic Value
\i0 . Princeton University Press, 2009.\
Ayer, A.J. \'93Foundations of Ethics.\'94 edited by Russ Shaffer-Landeau and Terence Cuneo. Blackwell, 2007.\
Balfour, Arthur J. 
\i Theism and Humanism
\i0 . Hodder & Stoughton, 1915.\
Beauchamp, Tom L, and James F Childress. 
\i Principles of Biomedical Ethics
\i0 . Oxford, 2001.\
Bentham, Jeremy. 
\i Introduction to the Principles of Morality and Legislation
\i0 , n.d.\
Bernstein, Richard. \'93Whatever Happened to Naturalism.\'94 
\i Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association
\i0  69, no. 2 (November 1995): 57\'9676.\
Blackburn, Simon. 
\i Essays in Quasi-Realism
\i0 . Oxford, 1993.\
Bloomfield, Paul. 
\i Moral Reality
\i0 . Oxford, 2003.\
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Virtue Epistemology and the Epistemology of Virtue.\'94 
\i Philosophical and Phenomenological Research
\i0 , 2000, 23\'9643.\
Bourget, David, and David J Chalmers. \'93What Do Philosophers Believe?\'94 
\i Philosophical Studies
\i0  170, no. 3 (2014): 465\'96500.\
Boyd, Richard. \'93Finite Beings, Finite Goods: The Semantics, Metaphysics and Ethics of Naturalist Consequentialism, Part I1.\'94 
\i Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
\i0  66, no. 3 (2003): 505\'9653.\
Boyd, Richard N. \'93How to Be a Moral Realist.\'94 
\i Contemporary Materialism
\i0 , 1988, 307.\
Brandom, Robert. 
\i Reason in Philosophy: Animating Ideas
\i0 . Harvard University Press, 2009.\
Brewer, Talbot. 
\i The Retrieval of Ethics
\i0 . Oxford, 2009.\
Brink, David Owen. 
\i Moral Realism and the Foundations of Ethics
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 1989.\
Brown, R. Stephen. 
\i Moral Virtue and Nature: A Defense of Ethical Naturalism
\i0 . Continuum, 2008.\
Brown, Stephen. \'93Really Naturalizing Virtue.\'94 
\i Ethic@
\i0  4 (2005): 7\'9622.\
Copp, David. \'93A Skeptical Challenge to Moral Non-Naturalism and a Defense of Constructivist Naturalism*.\'94 
\i Philosophical Studies
\i0  126, no. 2 (2005): 269\'9683.\
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Darwinian Skepticism About Moral Realism*.\'94 
\i Philosophical Issues
\i0  18, no. 1 (2008): 186\'96206.\
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Why Naturalism?\'94 
\i Ethical Theory and Moral Practice
\i0  6, no. 2 (2003): 179\'96200.\
Cuneo, Terence. 
\i The Normative Web
\i0 . Oxford, 2007.\
Darwall, Stephen L. \'93Moral Discourse and Practice: Some Philosophical Approaches,\'94 1997.\
Depaul, Michael R. \'93Review of Moral Realism and the Foundations of Ethics by David Brink.\'94 
\i Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
\i0  53, no. 3 (1993): 731\'9635.\
Dupr\'e9, John. \'93The Miracle of Monism,\'94 2004.\
Engelhardt, H Tristram. 
\i The Foundations of Bioethics
\i0 . Oxford, 1996.\
Enoch, David. \'93How Is Moral Disagreement a Problem for Realism?\'94 
\i The Journal of Ethics
\i0  13, no. 1 (2009): 15\'9650.\
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Taking Morality Seriously: A Defense of Robust Realism
\i0 . Oxford, 2011.\
Fink, Hans. \'93Three Sorts of Naturalism.\'94 
\i European Journal of Philosophy
\i0  14, no. 2 (August 2006): 202\'9621.\
Finlay, Stephen. \'93Four Faces of Moral Realism.\'94 
\i Philosophy Compass
\i0 , no. 2 (2007): 820\'9649.\
Fitterer, Robert John. 
\i Love and Objectivity in Virtue Ethics: Aristotle, Lonergan, and Nussbaum on Emotions and Moral Insight
\i0 . University of Toronto Press, 2008.\
Foot, Philippa. \'93Morality as a System of Hypothetical Imperatives.\'94 
\i The Philosophical Review
\i0 , 1972, 305\'9616.\
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Natural Goodness
\i0 . Oxford, 2003.\
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Virtues and Vices: And Other Essays in Moral Philosophy
\i0 . Oxford, 2003.\
Frankena, William K. \'93The Naturalistic Fallacy.\'94 
\i Mind
\i0 , 1939, 464\'9677.\
Freiman, Christopher. \'93Goodwill Toward Nature.\'94 
\i Environmental Values
\i0  18, no. 3 (2009): 343\'9659.\
Gasser, ed. Georg, ed. 
\i How Successful Is Naturalism?
\i0  Vol. 4. Rutgers? Walter de Gruyter?, 2008.\
Geech, P. T. 
\i The Virtues
\i0 . Cambridge, 1977.\
Gert, Bernard. 
\i Common Morality: Deciding What to Do
\i0 . Oxford, 2004.\
Gibbard, Allan. 
\i Thinking How to Live
\i0 . Harvard, 2009.\
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Wise Choices, Apt Feelings: A Theory of Normative Judgment
\i0 . Harvard, 1992.\
Giorgini, Giovanni. \'93Crick, Hampshire and MacIntyre, or Does an English Speaking Neo-Aristotelianism Exist?,\'94 n.d.\
Goetz, Stewart, and Charles Taliaferro. 
\i Naturalism
\i0 . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing, 2008.\
Hacker-Wright, John. \'93What Is Natural about Foot\'92s Ethical Naturalism?\'94 
\i Ratio
\i0  22, no. 3 (2009): 308\'9621.\
Hare, R. M. 
\i Language of MOrals
\i0 . Oxford, 1991.\
Harman, Gilbert. \'93Moral Explanations of Natural facts\'97Can Moral Claims Be Tested against Moral Reality?\'94 
\i The Southern Journal of Philosophy
\i0  24, no. S1 (1986): 57\'9668.\
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Moral Relativism Defended.\'94 
\i The Philosophical Review
\i0 , 1975, 3\'9622.\
Heinaman, Robert. \'93Aristotle and Moral Realism,\'94 n.d.\
Horgan, Terry, and Mark Timmons. \'93Metaethics After Moore,\'94 2006.\
Hume, David. 
\i Enquiry Concerning the Principles of MOrals
\i0 , n.d.\
Hursthouse, Rosalind. 
\i On Virtue Ethics
\i0 . Oxford, 1998.\
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Virtue Ethics and Human Nature.\'94 
\i Hume Studies
\i0  25, no. 1 (1999): 67\'9682.\
Jackson, Frank. 
\i From Metaphysics to Ethics
\i0 , 1998.\
Jelbert, S.A. et. al. \'93Using the Aesop\'92s Fable Paradigm to Investigate Causal Understanding of Water Displacement by New Caledonian Crows.\'94 
\i Public LIbrary of Science
\i0  9, no. 3 (2014).\
Joyce, Richard. 
\i The Myth of Morality
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 2001.\
Kelly, Erin. \'93Against Naturalism in Ethics,\'94 2004.\
Kim, Jaegwon. 
\i Physicalism, or Something near Enough
\i0 . Princeton University Press, 2007.\
Korsgaard, Christine M. \'93Skepticism about Practical Reason.\'94 
\i The Journal of Philosophy
\i0 , 1986, 5\'9625.\
Little, Margaret Olivia. \'93Seeing and Caring: The Role of Affect in Feminist Moral Epistemology.\'94 
\i Hypatia
\i0  10, no. 3 (1995): 117\'9637.\
MacIntyre, Alasdair. 
\i After Virtue
\i0 . University of Notre Dame Press, 1984.\
Mackie, John. 
\i Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong
\i0 . Penguin UK, 1977.\
McDowell, John. 
\i Mind and World
\i0 . Harvard, 1996.\
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Mind, Value and Reality,\'94 167\'9697. Harvard, 1998.\
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Naturalism in the Philosophy of Mind.\'94 
\i Naturalism in Question
\i0 , 2004, 91\'96105.\
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Values and Secondary Qualities.\'94 In 
\i Morality and Objectivity
\i0 , edited by Ted Honderich, 110\'9629. Routledge, 1985.\
Mill, John Stuart. 
\i Utilitarianism
\i0 , n.d.\
Moore, G. E. 
\i Principia Ethica
\i0 . Cambridge University Press, 1903.\
Morgan, Lloyd. \'93Naturalism.\'94 
\i The Monist
\i0  6, no. 1 (1895): 76\'9690.\
Morgan, Seiriol. \'93Naturalism and Normativity.\'94 
\i Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
\i0  72, no. 2 (2006): pp. 319\'9644.\
Nagel, Thomas. 
\i Mind and Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo-Darwinian Conception of Nature Is Almost Certainly False
\i0 . Oxford, 2012.\
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Secular Philosophy and the Religious Temperament
\i0 . Oxford, 2009.\
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The Last Word (Philosophical Essays)
\i0 . Oxford, 2001.\
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i The View from Nowhere
\i0 . Oxford, 1989.\
Nussbaum, Martha. \'93Aristotle on Human Nature and the Foundations of Ethics.\'94 edited by J.E.J. Altham and Ross Harrison, 86\'96131. Cambridge, 1995.\

\i Plato\'92s Moral Realism
\i0 , n.d.\
Putnam, Hilary. \'93The Content and Appeal of Naturalism.\'94 Harvard, 2009.\
Radic, Stjepan. \'93Two Different Approaches to the Re-Aristotelisation of Contemporary Ethics: Neo-Aristotelianism of Alasdair MacIntyre and Martha Nussbaum.\'94 
\i Filozofska Istrazivanja
\i0  132 (2013): 643\'9657.\
Railton, Peter. \'93Aesthetic Value, Moral Value, and the Ambitions of Naturalism.\'94 
\i Aesthetics and Ethics: Essays at the Intersection
\i0 , 1998, 59\'96105.\
\'97\'97\'97. \'93Moral Realism.\'94 
\i Philosophical Review
\i0  95, no. 2 (1986).\
Reitsma, Regan Lance. \'93The Peculiar Flavor of Nagel\'92s Metaethics.\'94 
\i Expositions
\i0 , 2014.\
Rosenberg, Alex. 
\i The Atheist\'92s Guide to Reality: Enjoying Life without Illusions
\i0 . WW Norton & Company, 2011.\
Rubin, Michael. \'93Is Goodness a Homeostatic Property Cluster?*.\'94 
\i Ethics
\i0  118, no. 3 (2008): 496\'96528.\
Ruse, Michael. \'93Taking Darwin Seriously: A Naturalistic Approach to Philosophy,\'94 1986.\
Russell, E. S. 
\i Form and Function: A Contribution to the History of Animal Morphology
\i0 . Chicago, 1916.\
Schaber, Peter. \'93Normative Facts.\'94 
\i Studies into the Foundations of an Integral Theory of Practice and Cognition
\i0 , 2005, 107\'9622.\
Shafer-Landau, Russ. \'93Ethics as Philosophy: A Defense of Ethical Nonnaturalism.\'94 
\i Ethical Theory: An Anthology
\i0  13 (2012): 54.\
\'97\'97\'97. 
\i Moral Realism: A Defence
\i0 . 4. Oxford, 2003.\
Sinclair, Neil. \'93Two Kinds of Naturalism in Ethics.\'94 
\i Ethical Theory and Moral Practice
\i0  9, no. 4 (2006): pp. 417\'9639.\
Slote, Michael. \'93Ethics Naturalized.\'94 
\i Philosophical Perspectives
\i0 , 1992, 355\'9676.\
Smirnova, Anna et al. \'93Crows Spontaneously Exhibit Analogical Reasoning.\'94 
\i Current Biology
\i0  25, no. 2 (2015): 256\'9660.\
Smith, Michael R, and others. \'93The Moral Problem,\'94 1994.\
Smith, R Scott. 
\i Virtue Ethics and Moral Knowledge: Philosophy of Language after MacIntyre and Hauerwas
\i0 . Gower Publishing, Ltd., 2003.\
Storey, David. \'93Nihilism, Nature, and the Collapse of the Cosmos.\'94 
\i Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy
\i0  7, no. 2 (2011): 6\'9625.\
Stroud, Barry. \'93The Charm of Naturalism.\'94 In 
\i Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association
\i0 , 43\'9655. JSTOR, 1996.\
Sturgeon, Nicholas L. \'93Moore on Ethical Naturalism*.\'94 
\i Ethics
\i0  113, no. 3 (2003): 528\'9656.\
Superson, Anita M. 
\i The Moral Skeptic
\i0 . Oxford, 2009.\
Thompson, Allen. \'93Reconciling Themes in Neo-Aristotelian Meta-Ethics.\'94 
\i The Journal of Value Inquiry
\i0  41, no. 2 (2007): 245\'9663.\
Vogler, Candace. \'93Modern Moral Philosophy Again: Isolating the Promulgation Problem.\'94 
\i Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
\i0 , New Series, 106 (2006): pp. 347\'9664.\
Wallach, John R. \'93Contemporary Aristotelianism.\'94 
\i Political Theory
\i0  20, no. 4 (1992): 613\'9641.\
Wielenberg, Erik. \'93The Nature of Moral Virtue,\'94 2000.\
Wielenberg, Erik J. \'93In Defense of Non-Natural, Non-Theistic Moral Realism.\'94 
\i Faith and Philosophy
\i0  26, no. 1 (2009): 23\'9641.\
\'97\'97\'97. \'93On the Evolutionary Debunking of Morality*.\'94 
\i Ethics
\i0  120, no. 3 (2010): 441\'9664.\
Williams, Raymond. 
\i Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society
\i0 . Oxford, 1985.\
Wolterstorff, Nicholas. 
\i Justice: Rights and Wrongs
\i0 . Princeton University Press, 2010.\
}